The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Chronicles of Enguerrand de
Monstrelet, Vol. 12 [of 13], by Enguerrand de Monstrelet

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The Chronicles of Enguerrand de Monstrelet, Vol. 12 [of 13]
       Containing an account of the cruel civil wars between the houses
       of Orleans and Burgundy

Author: Enguerrand de Monstrelet

Translator: Thomas Johnes

Release Date: June 29, 2021 [eBook #65721]

Language: English

Produced by: Graeme Mackreth and The Online Distributed Proofreading
             Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
             images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRONICLES OF ENGUERRAND
DE MONSTRELET, VOL. 12 [OF 13] ***






 THE

 CHRONICLES

 OF

 ENGUERRAND DE MONSTRELET.




_H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-Street, Blackfriars, London._




 THE

 CHRONICLES

 OF

 ENGUERRAND DE MONSTRELET;

 CONTAINING

 AN ACCOUNT OF THE CRUEL CIVIL WARS BETWEEN THE HOUSES OF

 ORLEANS AND BURGUNDY;

 OF THE POSSESSION OF

 PARIS AND NORMANDY BY THE ENGLISH;

 _THEIR EXPULSION THENCE_;

 AND OF OTHER

 MEMORABLE EVENTS THAT HAPPENED IN THE KINGDOM OF FRANCE,

 AS WELL AS IN OTHER COUNTRIES.

 _A HISTORY OF FAIR EXAMPLE, AND OF GREAT PROFIT TO THE
 FRENCH_,

 _Beginning at the Year_ MCCCC. _where that of Sir JOHN FROISSART finishes,
 and ending at the Year_ MCCCCLXVII. _and continued by others to the
 Year_ MDXVI.

 TRANSLATED

 BY THOMAS JOHNES, ESQ.

 IN THIRTEEN VOLUMES VOL. XII.

 LONDON:

 PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN, PATERNOSTER-ROW;
 AND J. WHITE AND CO. FLEET-STREET.

 1810.




CONTENTS

OF

_THE TWELFTH VOLUME._


                                                       PAGE
  CHAP. I.

  The king of France enters the city of Naples
  in triumph. The attack and capture
  of the Castel Nuovo and the Castel del
  Ovo. Of the events that passed in Naples               1


  CHAP. II.

  King Charles makes his public entry into
  Naples, as king of that country and monarch
  of all Italy                                          15


  CHAP. III.

  King Charles makes dispositions to return
  to France, and takes leave of his subjects
  in Naples                                             18


  CHAP. IV.

  King Charles returns from Naples to France            19


  CHAP. V.

  The battle of Foronuovo, where the king
  of France gains a complete victory over
  the confederated princes of Italy                     24


  CHAP. VI.

  The king decamps from Foronuovo, to return
  to France                                             30


  CHAP. VII.

  The king of France goes to St Denis. He
  returns to Amboise, and there suddenly
  dies of a fit of apoplexy                             36


  CHAP. VIII.

  Of the funeral services performed for king
  Charles VIII, of France, at Amboise, Paris,
  and St Denis                                          39


  CHAP. IX.

  Of king Louis the Twelfth                             41


  CHAP. X.

  Duke Ludovico Sforza is made prisoner before
  Novara, and carried to France                         47


  CHAP. XI.

  The cardinal Ascanius, brother to the duke
  of Milan, is taken prisoner, and carried
  to France                                             51


  CHAP. XII.

  The inhabitants of Milan are bribed into
  subjection                                            53


  CHAP. XIII.

  The king of France sends troops to reconquer
  Naples, which in a short time is won,
  and Frederick, styling himself king thereof,
  comes to France                                       74


  CHAP. XIV.

  The cardinal of Amboise makes his public
  entry into Lyon, as legate to France                  76


  CHAP. XV.

  The French, after the capture of Naples,
  make war on the Turks                                 77


  CHAP. XVI.

  The archduke makes his entry into Lyon.
  Another heretic                                       82


  CHAP. XVII.

  The cardinal of St Pietro ad vincula elected
  pope                                                  88


  CHAP. XVIII.

  The Sophi of Persia makes war on the Turk
  Usson Cassan                                          92


  CHAP. XIX.

  A great mortality from the unwholesomeness
  of the season. Of the deaths of
  many persons of note                                  97


  CHAP. XX.

  The deaths of the archduke and of the
  queen of Hungary                                     105


  CHAP. XXI.

  The pope, by the assistance of the French,
  gains Bologna                                        106


  CHAP. XXII.

  Of the damsel Trivulce                               108


  CHAP. XXIII.

  Of the league of Cambray, formed by the
  cardinal of Amboise, between the pope,
  the emperor Maximilian, the king of
  France, and the king of Spain, against
  the Venetians. The king of France defeats
  the Venetians at Agnadello                           112


  CHAP. XXIV.

  A war between Pope Julius and the king of
  France, on account of the duke of Ferrara.
  A council of the church assembled
  at the instance of the emperor Maximilian
  and the king of France, to the dissatisfaction
  of the pope. Bologna taken by
  the French                                           118


  CHAP. XXV.

  The duke of Nemours marches his army
  against Brescia. On taking the town, a
  great slaughter ensues                               124


  CHAP. XXVI.

  The duke of Nemours defeats the united
  armies of the pope, the Venetians, and
  the Spaniards, near to Ravenna, but is
  himself slain, after he had gained the
  victory, and totally repulsed the enemy              129


  CHAP. XXVII.

  On the departure of the French from Italy,
  the Swiss take the town of Milan and
  other places held by the king of France              138


  CHAP. XXVIII.

  Of the war in Guienne. The king of France
  sends succours to the king of Navarre.
  The king of England makes preparations
  to invade France. A sea fight between
  two large English and French ships                   143


  CHAP. XXIX.

  The king of England disembarks with his
  whole army at Calais. The French are
  defeated by the Swiss, at Novara                     147


  CHAP. XXX.

  A body of French on their return from
  victualling Therouenne, besieged by the
  English and Hainaulters, are attacked and
  put to flight                                        151


  CHAP. XXXI.

  The king of Scotland enters England with
  a powerful army. He is slain. Peace concluded
  between the king of France and
  the Venetians                                        154


  CHAP. XXXII.

  The towns of Therouenne and Tournay surrender
  to the English on capitulation                       156


  CHAP. XXXIII.

  Of the death and interment of the most
  Christian queen of France, Anne of Brittany          161


  CHAP. XXXIV.

  The king of France marries the princess
  Mary, sister to king Henry of England.
  Francis duke of Valois and count of Angoulesme
  marries the princess Claude,
  daughter to the king of France. The
  new queen makes her public entry into
  France                                               162


  CHAP. XXXV.

  Of the tilts performed at Paris. The death
  and interment of Louis XI. king of
  France                                               168


  CHAP. XXXVI.

  Francis I. king of France, is consecrated at
  Rheims. He makes his public entry into
  Paris. He leaves France to attack the
  Swiss, in the Milanese, who have taken
  possession of that duchy                             171


  CHAP. XXXVII.

  The king of France pursues the Swiss with
  his whole army. The town and castle of
  Novara surrender to the king                         179


  CHAP. XXXVIII.

  The king of France defeats the Swiss army
  at Marignano, on the feast day of the exaltation
  of the cross. Of the cruel battle
  and slaughter of the French and Swiss                182


  CHAP. XXXIX.

  Milan surrenders to the king of France.
  The castle, besieged by the French, surrenders
  on capitulation                                      191


  CHAP. XL.

  Pope Leo X. and the king of France meet
  at Bologna, to confer on the state of affairs.
  The king returns to France                           194


  CHAP. XLI.

  The emperor Maximilian assembles a large
  army, to attempt the conquest of the
  Milanese, and to drive the French out of
  Italy. The constable of Bourbon, lieutenant-general
  for the king in Italy, marches
  against him                                          198


  CHAP. XLII.

  The emperor Maximilian, finding that he
  could not succeed in his attempt on Milan,
  marches away                                         202


  CHAP. XLIII.

  The king of France goes on a pilgrimage to
  the church of the Holy Handkerchief in
  Chambery. A treaty of peace concluded
  between him and the archduke king of
  Spain                                                204




 HERE BEGINNETH
 THE TWELFTH VOLUME
 OF THE
 CHRONICLES
 OF
 _ENGUERRAND DE MONSTRELET._




CHAP. I.

 THE KING OF FRANCE ENTERS THE CITY OF NAPLES IN TRIUMPH.--THE ATTACK
 AND CAPTURE OF THE CASTEL NUOVO AND THE CASTEL DEL OVO.--OF THE EVENTS
 THAT PASSED IN NAPLES.


On Sunday, the 22d day of February, in the year 1494, king Charles
dressed himself in his royal robes, and triumphantly entered the city
of Naples. Although he afterwards made another entry, as shall be more
fully detailed, he, however, showed himself this day the true king and
potent lord of Naples, and went thence to the castle of Capua.

As some of the partisans of king Alphonso still held the citadel of
Naples, the Castel Nuovo, and the Castel del Ovo, king Charles ordered
them to be instantly attacked, although one side of the citadel was
washed by the sea. He had his battering artillery pointed against the
Castel Nuovo; and the captains of the guard for the king were sir
Gabriel de Montfaucon, Jean de la Grange, and others of rank.

Not to prolong matters, the citadel was gained after a very severe
attack; and the Germans, Neapolitans, and Spaniards, of the party
adverse to the king of France, burnt the outworks and hastily retreated
to join their associates in the Castel Nuovo. In the citadel were found
the largest cannons that had ever been seen, with such quantities of
other things of an extraordinary appearance that it was more than eight
days before the place could be cleared, by employing numbers of people
and carts.

Wednesday, the 25th day of February, the king, after hearing mass
in the church of the Annonciada went to dine with the lord de
Montpensier, and thence, accompanied by his lords, repaired to the
citadel to examine how it had been battered, and to consult on the
best means of conquering the Castel Nuovo. The next day the garrison
demanded a parley, on which the artillery ceased firing,--and the lord
Angilbert of Cleves, the lord of Ligny, the bailiff of Dijon, and the
great chamberlain to the queen advanced to confer with them. The first
demand of the garrison was, that the king would grant them a truce for
twenty-four hours, which was cheerfully acceded to: the next, that
they might, on the morrow, march away with arms and baggage, which was
refused.

On the twenty-four hours being expired, the artillery played more
fiercely than before,--and it was a pitiful sight to view the ruins of
this Castel Nuovo, which was exceedingly strong. The besieged fired
a piece of artillery against the church of the Franciscans of the
observantine order, which broke through the roof, but did not the least
mischief to crowds of persons, of both sexes, then in the church. The
incessant firing of the batteries lasted from Thursday to the Monday
following,--and there were so many breaches, for the king was there
in person, that the garrison again demanded a cessation of arms for
another parley. The lord Angilbert of Cleves and the bailiff of Dijon,
who spoke German, met the deputies from the castle. They demanded
permission to march away in safety with their baggage, to receive
three months pay to serve the king, if it should be agreeable to him;
otherwise, to receive passports for them to go whither-soever they
pleased.

The cessation of arms was renewed from day to day, as the parley was
prolonged by the garrison until the 3d of March, in expectation of
being relieved by king Alphonso. But when they found all hopes of
relief vain, and that the batteries were about to recommence with more
violence than ever, they were forced to abandon themselves to the mercy
of the king, into whose hands they surrendered themselves. He allowed
them to keep their baggage; but all artillery, stores, and provisions,
were to remain in the castle, which he immediately re-garrisoned with
his troops, and with able captains, for its defence.

During the king's stay at that pleasant place Poggio-Réalé, the
daughter of the duchess of Melfy[1], in company with her mother, came
thither, mounted on a superb courser of La Puglia, and throwing the
bridle on his neck, made him gallop four or five long courses; after
which she made him curvet and bound, as well as the most excellent
rider could have done, which pleased the king very much,--and he made
her a handsome present.

Monday, the 4th of March, the king had the Castel del Ovo besieged,
and strongly battered on the land side; the others were surrounded by
the sea. This day, the king heard mass at the carthusian convent, and
dined with the lord of Clerieux[2]: he afterwards visited the siege
of the Castel del Ovo, of which the artillery had already destroyed
great part,--for the canoniers had performed their duty wonderfully
well, insomuch that about five o'clock in the afternoon the garrison
demanded a parley. The king being there in person, consented to it, and
sent thither the lords de Foix and de Miolan, who having heard their
proposals, carried them to the king while at supper.

Thursday, the 5th of March, the king again returned to the siege,
after his dinner; and while he was in the trenches with his artillery,
the prince of Tarentum waited on him. The lord de Guise, the lord
de Ligny, the master of the household Brillac, had advanced to meet
the prince, and remained as hostages for his safe return after the
conference. The king and prince were both sumptuously dressed, and
conversed by themselves for some time, in a garden adjoining to the
park of artillery, to all appearance with great politeness. When the
conversation was ended, the king called to him the lord de Montpensier,
the lord de Foix, the lord de la Trimouille, the lord de Miolan,
the mareschal de Gie, and several others, with whom he talked for a
considerable time, surrounded by his guards. When it was over, the
prince took leave of the king, and returned to his galley, which was
anchored off the shore, attended by many of the french lords, according
to the king's orders. On his arrival at the shore, he took leave of
these lords, commending himself to the good graces of their king; and
when he had embarked in his galley they went back to relate to the king
all that had passed, and his praises of the reception he had had. On
this day the artillery did not play on either side.

Friday, the 6th of March, the king, having heard mass, went to dine
with the lord de Clerieux,--and this day many of the garrison (among
whom were several of the wounded) left the Castel del Ovo. The
Spaniards went to the prince of Tarentum, and the Germans surrendered
themselves to the king, having passports for the purpose. The lord de
Cressol, sir Gabriel de Montfaucon, by the king's command, entered the
castle with a body of men under arms, and archers, to take charge of
it, and the numberless stores within it.

Saturday, the 7th of March, the king went to examine the Castel del
Ovo, and then departed to lay siege to the opposite castle. Towards
evening, the prince of Tarentum paid another visit to the king, near
to the park of artillery,--and the lords de Guise and de Ligny were
hostages for his safe return. This conference was short, for it was
late; and when the prince returned to his galley the above lords
rejoined the king. It is worthy of remark, that on this day the prince
of Salernum, who had been, five years a fugitive from Naples, through
fear of king Alphonso, returned thither, and recovered a young son who
had been, by Alphonso, confined in prison,--for the cardinal of San
Pietro ad vincula had paid a very large sum for his ransom.

On Sunday, the 8th of March, the king having heard mass, and dined,
went to amuse himself at the siege, and sent the governor of Paris,
and the esquire Galiot, to summon the garrison to surrender, otherwise
he would shortly batter the walls about their ears. They refused to
comply; and, in consequence, the batteries were played with such effect
that, on the Thursday following, the 12th, they knew not where to
shelter themselves,--and the governor was constrained to come from
the castle to speak with the king, then in the trenches. The governor,
bareheaded and on his knees, besought the king, with uplifted hands, to
grant a truce until the morrow, and to receive the garrison mercifully,
which was granted. The governor was a handsome, tall figure, with white
hairs; and, on having this answer, he returned by sea to the castle,
accompanied by the prince of Salernum and the mareschal de Gie, to
parley with the garrison in the castle. Shortly after, the captains
Claude de Rabaudanges and the lord de la Vernade were appointed
governors of this castle,--and nothing was taken out of it.

The king, on the following sunday, after hearing mass, returned to the
castle of Capua, and remained some days, to receive the homages of the
princes and princesses of the realm, together with those of the nobles
and inhabitants as well of Naples as of the Terra di Lavora, Calabria,
La Puglia, and of other parts subjected to the crown of Naples. He had
there established his chancery, and courts of justice and finance,
with presidents like as in France. The president Guennay was the
chancellor, having the king's secretaries under him, with great and
smaller seals for all requisite acts. He ordered money to be coined of
gold and silver, and other metal; such as crowns, ducats, and various
pieces, both double and single, having the arms of France impressed on
one side, and on the reverse the arms of Sicily, quartered with the
small crosses of Jerusalem.

The king now appointed many new officers for the city of Naples, and
in other towns,--namely, judges, masters of the mint, and of various
descriptions. During this interval, he visited the different churches
in Naples, and every thing worth seeing there and in its neighbourhood.
While thus employed, he had many very fine entertainments given him by
the nobility in Naples, and others,--but it would be tiresome to detail
them all.

News arrived on the Wednesday, that Gaieta was taken by the french
troops: in consequence of which, the king sent the seneschal of
Beaucaire on the morrow to take the government of it. During the
month of April, the king inspected his artillery, and that which had
been found in the castles of Naples: the greater part of the last was
transported to France. The lord d'Aubigny left Naples this month for
Calabria, accompanied by his men at arms and a large body of Germans.
The 15th of April, the king, after hearing mass in the church of the
Annonciada, was confessed, and then touched and cured great numbers
that were afflicted with the evil,--a disorder that abounded much all
over Italy,--when the spectators were greatly edified at the powers of
such an extraordinary gift. This day the lord Virgilio Orsini and the
count of Petilano waited on the king for the first time since they had
been made prisoners.

The next day, which was Maunday-Thursday, the 16th of April, the king
heard divine service in the church of St John, a handsome building,
and attended (as if in France) on thirteen poor persons, who were
washed and waited on at dinner, and presented with thirteen crowns.
The sermon was preached on that and the two following days by master
Pinelli, a doctor of divinity in the university of Paris.

On Easter-day, the 19th of April, the king was confessed in the church
of St Peter, adjoining to his lodgings, and then touched for the evil a
second time; after which he heard mass in the church of St John, and in
the evening a sermon by doctor Pinelli.--Wednesday, the 22d, the king
went to see the tiltings, the lists for which had been erected near
to a church founded by the Anjou-race of kings of Sicily, where were
many of the nobility and ladies of Italy. These justings lasted from
Wednesday until the first of May: the holders of them were Châtillon
and Bourdillon, and the assailants were very numerous,--and excellent
deeds of arms were done on each side.

On Sunday, being the feast of St Januarius, the king heard mass in the
cathedral or church of St Januarius, where many cardinals, bishops,
and prelates attended. The head of St Januarius was publicly displayed
to the king, and some of his blood in a glass bottle: it was congealed
like a stone, as the king proved by touching it with a small rod of
silver; but no sooner was it placed near to the head than it began
instantly to melt and become liquid, to the astonishment of many who
viewed this miracle.

The prelates of the church said, that by means of this miraculous head
and blood of St Januarius, they were made acquainted with the success
of their petitions to God; for when their prayers had been propitious,
the blood became liquid,--but when otherwise, it remained hard. They
were likewise by this means informed as to the dispositions of their
prince, and whether he was to reign over them or not, which seemed very
extraordinary.

On Monday, the 4th of May, the king sent Jean du Bois, Fontaines, and
the master of the household de Bresse, to make an inventory of all the
stores, and other effects, in the Castel del Ovo,--for there appeared
to be such quantities of provision, and of other things, that the
value seemed inestimable. During this time, the king visited several
places in the neighbourhood of Naples; such as the grotto which Virgil
had pierced with such subtile art through a high mountain on the
seashore of Naples, which is a wonderful thing, as there is no other
road but through this subterraneous passage, as all who have seen it
can testify. A little further on is the Solfaterra, where sulphur is
made,--and there are natural fires beneath the surface that are always
burning: the king saw them make sulphur. There are, likewise near,
many springs of hot water as well as of cold; and in a valley of this
mountain is a hole through which comes such an impetuous wind that it
supports in the air stones, and pieces of wood, that are thrown into
it,--and it is said that the heat is very great within this hole. The
king visited another remarkable spot where alum is made, and saw the
whole process. Near to this last place is a cavern having a deadly
quality; for whatever is thrown in perishes instantly, as was proved
before the king on an ass and cat, which, on being thrown in, were
suddenly killed[3]. The king, having seen all that was most curious,
returned to Naples for the night.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Melfy. Q. Amelfi?]

[Footnote 2: Clerieux. William of Poitiers, lord of Clerieux, governor
of Paris.]

[Footnote 3: This must be the Grotto del Cane, not far from the
Solfaterra. Although small animals perish, yet I doubt whether an ass
could be thrown in, or would be so suddenly killed.]




CHAP. II.

 KING CHARLES MAKES HIS PUBLIC ENTRY INTO NAPLES, AS KING OF THAT
 COUNTRY AND MONARCH OF ALL ITALY.


Tuesday, the 12th of May, the king, having heard mass in the church of
the Annonciada, left Naples after dinner for Poggio-Réalé,--where all
the princes and nobles of France and Italy were assembled, to accompany
him in his public entry into Naples, as king of France, Sicily, and
Jerusalem. He was dressed in royal robes, and made a most splendid and
triumphant entry, and thenceforward was called Charles Cæsar Augustus.
In his right hand was the globe, and his sceptre in the left,--and his
mantle was of fine scarlet trimmed with ermine, having a deep fall-down
collar, ornamented with ermines' tails also, with a brilliant crown on
his head. The horse he rode was as grandly caparisoned as possible,
to suit his state: and over his head was borne a splendid canopy by
the highest nobility of Naples, who were surrounded by the king's
valets richly dressed in cloth of gold: the provost of the household
with his archers on foot attended on him on each side. The seneschal
of Beaucaire represented the constable of Naples,--and the lord de
Montpensier preceded him, handsomely mounted, and dressed as viceroy
and lieutenant-general of Naples.

The prince of Salernum was present, together with the great lords of
France, of the blood royal, and knights-companions of the king's order;
such as, the lord de Bresse, the lord de Foix, the lord de Luxembourg,
the lord de Vendôme, and others without number, all dressed in mantles
like to what the king wore. In short, the entry was most magnificent;
and the nobility of Naples, with their ladies, presented to the king
their children of ten, twelve, and fifteen years of age, requesting of
him to make them knights, which he did with his own hand,--and it was a
splendid spectacle.

The prelates and clergy came out to meet him in the richest copes,
bearing relics, and conducted him to the cathedral, where on the high
altar were displayed, as before, the head and blood of St Januarius. In
front of the altar, the king swore to protect his new subjects, and to
preserve them in their liberties and privileges, which gave universal
satisfaction,--and great rejoicings were made on this occasion, and
also for his happy arrival, and the great good he had promised them.

The king was, after this, conducted to his palace, where, during
several days, he received embassies from different parts of his
kingdom; such as Calabria, La Puglia, L'Abruzzo, to do homage, and to
inquire respecting the manner in which they were to be governed by
a viceroy when the king should be absent, as was natural for them.
On Monday, the 18th of May, the king ordered a grand supper to be
prepared at the Castel Nuovo, where he gave a sumptuous banquet, to
his princes and nobles, seated at two tables, in the great hall of
the castle, to which was an ascent by several stone steps. The grand
seneschal of Naples served the whole of the supper, superbly mounted,
and clothed in white, with abundance of trumpets and clarions sounding.
After supper, the king received the homage of all the lords, and then
returned to sleep at his palace.




CHAP. III.

 KING CHARLES MAKES DISPOSITIONS TO RETURN TO FRANCE,--AND TAKES LEAVE
 OF HIS SUBJECTS IN NAPLES.


Wednesday, the 20th of May, the king, having heard mass with great
solemnity at the church of the Annonciada, dined at the palace; after
which, the nobility of Naples waited on him to take leave. They were
assembled in the great hall, where the king received them graciously,
and kindly bade them adieu! at the same time, he presented to them the
lord de Montpensier, as their viceroy and governor during his absence.
When this was done, the king departed from Naples, attended by a
gallant company of lords and gentlemen, men at arms, Swiss and Germans,
and slept that night at Aversa, on his return to France.




CHAP. IV.

 KING CHARLES RETURNS, FROM NAPLES TO FRANCE.


The king, as I have said, left Naples on the 20th of May, and halted
at Aversa. On the 21st, he marched from Aversa to Capua. On the
morrow, he dined and slept at the bishop's palace in Sezza[4]; and
on the Saturday, as he was about to enter Gaieta to refresh himself,
the castle fell down and obstructed the road, so that he returned to
Sezza,--but on the Sunday, when the damages had been repaired, he
proceeded and lay at Monte Cassino. Thence he passed to Ponte-corvo,
to Cyprienne, and to Fiorentino, a small city, then under an interdict
from pope Alexander, because the inhabitants had murdered and cut off
the arms of their bishop, who was a Spaniard, for having been obstinate
in supporting king Alphonso against the king of France. This latter
would not have been able to have heard mass that day, if he had not
before had full powers given him to order the celebration of the mass
in all places, according to his good pleasure.

On Friday, the 29th, the king advanced for the night to Valmontone,
wherein were many who hated the French, because they had destroyed and
burnt Monte-Fortino: nevertheless, he proceeded to Marina the next day,
and halted there till Sunday.

On Monday the first of June, the king re-entered Rome, on his return
to France, and was lodged in the palace of the cardinal de St Clement,
near to St Peter's. He was grandly accompanied by his nobles, gentlemen
pensioners, men at arms, cross-bowmen, Swiss and Germans; and because
pope Alexander was absent[5], he posted his men in different parts of
the town, to check any insolence of the Romans. Having done this, he
went to St Peter's, to return his thanksgivings to God. On Wednesday,
he left Rome, dined at Isola, and lay at Campanolle. Friday he
advanced to Ronciglione, and the same day entered Viterbo with his
whole army, where he was as well received as before. He remained in
Viterbo until Whitsunday was passed, to perform his devotions, and
visit the body of St Rosa.

On the 8th of June, the king supped and lay in the town of Monte
Fiascone, celebrated for its muscadine wines,--and thence, continuing
his march through La Paille and other places, arrived at Sienna, the
inhabitants of which came out to welcome him, magnificently dressed,
and with the same ceremonies as at the first of his coming thither.

The king marched from Sienna on the 17th of June for Poggiobondi,
where he lay, and staid the following morning, on account of its
being the feast of the holy sacrament, and attended the procession to
high mass with great devotion. After dinner he advanced to Château
Florentin,--and on the morrow he dined at Campane, near to Florence;
but he did not enter Florence on his return, for, under pretence of
being in the french interest, the town of Pont-Velle had been taken.

Saturday, the 20th of June, the king entered Pisa, where he was
received with every honour and submission. He staid there two days,
and on the Tuesday following dined at Pommart, and slept at Lucca,
where, in return for his handsome reception, he took the town under
his protection. He marched through Pietra Santa, and arrived, on the
Saturday, at Sarsaigne[6], where he had intelligence of the junction
of the duke of Milan with the Venetians. For this reason, he would not
sleep at Villa Franca, but encamped his army on the other side of the
river, where he supped, and waited for the arrival of his artillery,
and the rear of his army.

The king left his camp, at Villa Franca, on the 30th of June, to hear
mass at a large monastery near to Pontremoli; for the Germans had burnt
that town, in revenge for the murders of some of their countrymen by
the inhabitants, on their march to Naples. After dinner, the king
encamped at the foot of the Appenines, and there remained until his
artillery had passed the mountains. The lord de la Trimouille and Jean
de la Grange were charged with this business,--and although there
were plenty of hands they had great difficulties, on account of the
rocks. On the 3d of July, and the following day, the king crossed the
Appenines, and passed through Verceil and Cassano, and encamped his
army near to Borgo de Taro, where he lay, under the security of strong
guards. Sunday, the 5th of July, the king heard mass in his camp,
and dined at Foronuovo[7], where he formed his plan for the order of
battle, with a main body, a van and reserve, and having the usual
guards established.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: Sezza,--29 miles NNW. of Naples.]

[Footnote 5: The pope had fled to Orvieto, conscious of having deceived
the king, and fearful of consequences.]

[Footnote 6: Sarsaigne. Q. Sarsana?]

[Footnote 7: Foronuovo,--eight miles from Parma.]




CHAP. V.

 THE BATTLE OF FORONUOVO, WHERE THE KING OF FRANCE GAINS A COMPLETE
 VICTORY OVER THE CONFEDERATED PRINCES OF ITALY.


On Monday the 6th of July, in the year 1495, the french army was
encamped adjoining to the valley of Taro, about two miles from
Foronuovo, and four from Parma. Thence marched that gallant prince,
Charles VIII. of the name, king of France, accompanied by those valiant
captains before mentioned, and about eight or nine thousand courageous
men at arms, to meet from fifty to sixty thousand Lombards, Venetians,
Estradiots[8], and others, his enemies. The marquis of Mantua was
commander of the Venetians: count Galeas Sforza was the representative
of his brother, Ludovico duke of Milan, and the lord of Ferrara
commanded the rest of the traitors, in company with other captains.

The king was armed from head to foot in a manner becoming so great
a prince. Over his armour he wore a jacket, with short sleeves, of
a white and violet colour, besprinkled with crosses of Jerusalem.
His helmet was magnificently ornamented with feathers,--and he was
accoutred like a good man at arms, with sword, dagger, spear and
battle-axe. He was mounted on a powerful black horse, called Savoy,
whose caparison was of the same colours with the king's jacket, and
besprinkled with similar small crosses. The king was surrounded by very
able and trusty advisers to direct him, having under them about two
thousand men, who afterwards gave good proofs of their valour.

When the french army had been properly arranged, and the artillery
was ready, they began to advance toward the enemy in such wise as the
ground served them. The Italians not knowing in what division of the
army the king had posted himself, sent a herald, under pretence of
asking something from him,--and the herald, on his return, told them
the manner in which the king was accoutred. They now began to move,
and taking advantage of a favourable situation, discharged a heavy
piece of artillery at the van of the french, which wounded and killed
several, although it did not break their ranks, nor cause any great
confusion. A sharp cannonading followed; but the king's artillery
did great mischief to the enemy, and killed one of their principal
cannoniers, as was known from a trumpeter that was soon after made
prisoner. The king's artillery was so well served that the Italians
were forced to retreat, having noticed the excellent order in which the
French were formed.

It was wonderful to observe the cool and determined valour of the
gallant king, both in actions, and in speeches to those about his
person: 'How say you, my lords and friends? Are you not resolved to
serve me well to-day? and will you not live and die with me?' Then
having heard their answers, he continued, 'Be of good courage, and
not afraid; for although they be ten times our number,--which is the
case, as I know for certain,--yet we have justice on our side, for
which I put my confidence in God, that he will be pleased to give us
the victory over our enemies. I have also hopes that he will fight
this day on our side, and that, through his gracious favour, we shall
again triumph, as we have done throughout the whole of this expedition,
and return to France with honour to ourselves, through his merciful
kindness.' Such, or nearly similar, were the words with which this
valorous king consoled and encouraged all around him.

The enemy were much surprised at the good order of the French; and
to endeavour to break it, they sent a detachment of Estradiots, and
some Albanians, across a hill, to fall on the baggage. Those who had
the guard of it had been very negligent in not keeping themselves
in readiness to resist an attack, by reason of some dispute among
themselves, for which they suffered; but it was not much, as shall be
told hereafter,--and the army remained unbroken.

The Italians, seeing this, sent a herald to the king to demand a truce.
The king replied,--'If they wish for a truce, let them meet me between
the two armies.' But he afterward sent to them, to say, that if they
would, through friendship, allow him and his army a free passage to
France, it was all he wanted, otherwise he would force his passage in
spite of them.

The Lombards and Venetians, hearing this message from the king's
herald, detained him, and resolved instantly to charge the French,
like madmen. They were particularly desirous to attack the division
where the king was, to put him to death,--but God was that day his
Protector. The advanced guard, perceiving the enemy thus hastily
marching, informed the king of their gaining the woods and bushes;
on which he crossed the bed of the Taro, and each army was in sight
of the other. In fact, the Italians were handsomely equipped and
mounted, and advanced with the appearance of a determined courage, as
they were far superior in numbers to the French. Their best men were
placed in front,--and the first onset was very severe on both sides.
As they had been informed by their herald how the king was dressed,
their chief attack was made on his division, and with such success
that they advanced to his person; but he displayed great valour, and
was so heartily seconded by those near him that the enemies were
completely repulsed, with immense slaughter; even the boldest among
them attributed their highest honour to him who could fly the fastest;
for when they saw the day was lost, the best piece of all their armour
was the point of their spurs.

Only one man of rank was made prisoner on the side of the French,
namely, Matthew bastard of Bourbon, who had most valiantly defended
the king, and he was taken when pursuing the enemy up to their lines.
Not more than nine or ten french gentlemen were killed, although
their enemies were ten to one against them, the greater part of whom
saved themselves by flight. This proves, beyond a doubt, that Divine
Providence assisted the French, and gave them the victory over their
disloyal enemies, who were conquered in so very short a space of time.
The king remained the whole of the day armed and on horseback, and
until the whole of his army had retired within their camp. Thither
came ambassadors to him from the Italians, to demand the prisoners; but
they were answered, that they should not be restored,--which astonished
them greatly, as they feared that some of their first nobility had been
either killed or made prisoners.

The king and his nobles, in sign of triumph and victory, supped and
lay on the field of battle,--where they ate and drank what they could
find, and as it pleased God, to whom they gave their most humble
thanksgivings and praises for their success, as indeed they were
bounden to do.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 8: Estradiots,--a sort of light horse, or a militia.]




CHAP. VI.

 THE KING DECAMPS FROM FORONUOVO, TO RETURN TO FRANCE.


On the morrow of the battle of Foronuovo, the 7th of July, the king,
after hearing early mass, decamped from before Foronuovo, and posted
his army on an elevated situation called Magdelan, about half a
french league from his late camp, where he remained the whole day.
The commanders of the artillery made such diligence in bringing up
the cannon that they were placed round the king, as was usual in such
cases. The king marched away, on the Wednesday, with his army and
artillery, and repassed several towns wherein he had halted on his
advance to Naples, notwithstanding the attempts of the enemy to prevent
it. He came at length to Novara, and delivered the duke of Orleans, who
had been shut up in that town, with a party of his men, by the traitor
Ludovico of Milan. Thence the king proceeded to Asti and to Vercelli,
where the duke of Orleans came to meet him. The king received him with
much friendship, and they supped together.

On Friday, the 2d of October in this year, the lord de Vendôme died
in the town of Vercelli. His death was much lamented by the king
and his nobles, for he was a notable prince. The following Tuesday,
the king had a funeral service performed with much solemnity in
the cathedral-church dedicated to St Eusebius, where great grief
was manifested by all the assistants; and afterward his body was
transported to France, to be interred among his ancestors.

On Wednesday, the 7th of October, the bishop of Sion arrived at
Vercelli, with a body of Swiss, horse and foot, and others from the
german allies of the king, for his better security. The king thanked
the bishop for his friendship, and grandly feasted him and the troops
he had brought.

The next day, ambassadors came to the king from Ludovico of Milan and
the Venetians, and earnestly demanded a treaty, having witnessed the
strength of the king, and the enterprising courage of his troops,--when
a treaty was agreed to, on much better terms than they deserved.

On Saturday, the 10th of October, the king heard mass in the church
of the Cordeliers in Vercelli, adjoining his lodgings; and after his
dinner, he proceeded to Trino, where he halted until the 15th of
October, when he went to Crescentino, and from this place, by many
days march, arrived at Grenoble, passing through the following towns;
Sillans, Sessia[9], Turin, Quiers, Rivoli, Suza, Briançon, Nôtre
Dame d'Embrun, Savines, Saint Eusebe, La Meure[10], and Tault near to
Grenoble. He arrived at Grenoble about vespers, on the 27th of October;
and all ranks of people went out in procession, and made another public
entry for him on his return from the campaign of Italy.

The king, being unwell, remained in Grenoble until the 3d of
November, when he set out for Lyon, passing through the towns of St
Rambert, where he staid some days, Sillans, La Côte St André, and
Chatonay,--from which last place he advanced nearer to Lyon, where he
slept.

On Saturday, the 7th of November, having dined at Venisseu, he
proceeded to Lyon, whence all the churchmen came out in grand
procession, dressed in their robes, and bearing relics, to meet and
welcome him on his return from Italy. He made a public entry into Lyon,
as king of Jerusalem, Naples, and Sicily, attended by all the municipal
officers, and persons of rank in that town, handsomely dressed. He
was conducted triumphantly through the streets, accompanied by the
nobles and captains, who were looked at with pleasure in consequence
of the noble victory they had gained over such superior numbers. The
streets and squares were hung with tapestries: bonfires and mysteries
were exhibited in all the open spaces through which the king passed,
in his way to the archbishop's palace, that had been prepared for his
lodgings. Here the queen and the duchess of Bourbon his sister were
waiting, with many noble ladies and damsels, impatient to receive him;
and indeed he was deserving of such eagerness.

The king held most sumptuous justs at three different places in Lyon:
at La Grenette in front of the convent of Cordeliers, in the Juerie,
and before the palace: at all of them, he was foremost to offer
himself, and performed many gallant feats with lance and sword, on
horseback and on foot, as did several others of the french lords. In
memory of these justs, three stone columns were erected,--and to this
day there exist the latin verses that were inscribed on them, for king
Charles was the principal tenant of the lists.

Prior to the expedition to Naples, the king had the body of the
seraphic doctor, St Bonaventure, raised with great pomp from his tomb
in the church of the Cordeliers,--and the duke and duchess of Bourbon
had his shrine afterward covered with plates of silver. The king, at
the same time, founded the convent of the Cordeliers of the Observance
in the city of Lyon, which is become a place of much devotion.

When the king had staid some days in Lyon, he resolved to pursue his
journey, to pay his devotions at the abbey of St Denis, and return
thence to Amboise,--which he did, as shall be hereafter related.

In the year 1496, the son of the king of Spain died,--and the same year
died the duke of Savoy, who was said, by those lately returned from
Italy, to have poisoned the whole country of Piedmont.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 9: Sessia. Q. Borgo de Sessia?]

[Footnote 10: La Meure. Q. La Meyrie? in the election of Grenoble.]




CHAP. VII.

 THE KING OF FRANCE GOES TO ST DENIS.--HE RETURNS TO AMBOISE, AND THERE
 SUDDENLY DIES, OF A FIT OF APOPLEXY.


When king Charles had made some stay in Lyon, and had witnessed the
tilts and tournaments that had been performed at Moulins, in the
Bourbonnois, he proceeded to the abbey of St Denis, to accomplish the
vow of pilgrimage he had made, and to offer up his thanksgivings to God
for the brilliant victories he had obtained over his enemies, and for
the successful issue of his expedition to Naples. He went likewise to
St Denis, to replace the blessed bodies of the holy martyrs, who repose
there, that had been taken down from their niches when the king set out
on his italian expedition.

It is an ancient and praiseworthy custom, that when the most Christian
kings of France undertake any foreign expedition in person, they
supplicate the aid and intercession of the glorious martyr St Denis,
and his companions Saint Rusticus and Saint Eleutherus. The shrines of
these saints are, in consequence, taken down from their niches on the
king's quitting his kingdom, and deposited in a private part of the
church. These holy bodies, thus deposited, cannot be replaced in their
former situations until the king shall return to St Denis from his
foreign expedition, whether it had been for conquest or pleasure.

King Charles, therefore, having been victorious throughout Italy,
followed the pious custom of his ancestors the kings of France. He
made a devout pilgrimage, to St Denis,--and the shrines of the martyrs
were, by him, replaced in their several niches, in the presence of
the great barons of France. The king would neither pass nor repass
through Paris on this pilgrimage, for reasons that moved him so to do,
but which I omit, to avoid prolixity. For this cause, when he left St
Denis, he took his road through St Antoine des Champs, thence over Le
Pont-de-Chalenton[11], and through Beauce, strait to the castle of
Amboise, where he found the queen and many lords and ladies of his
noble blood. He was received there by the inhabitants with the utmost
joy and honour.

He had not been long at Amboise before he heard of the treachery of the
Neapolitans, and the death of the noble Gilbert lord of Montpensier.
The remaining captains, unable to support themselves in Naples after
his loss, returned home as well as they could; for those traitors of
Lombardy and Naples had suddenly risen in rebellion,--and they could
not possibly receive succours in time from France, had they attempted
to hold out against them, from the great distance.

King Charles made preparations to avenge himself on them for their
treachery and infidelity,--but he had over-exerted himself in his late
expedition. His constitution, which was naturally feeble, became daily
worse: whence it happened, that as he was walking one day in a gallery
of the castle of Amboise with the queen, and amusing himself by looking
at some tennis-players, he was suddenly seized with a fit, and died
shortly after, in the twenty-eighth year of his age, and in the month
of April in the year 1497. May God have mercy on his soul!

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 11: Pont de Chalenton. Q. Charenton?]




CHAP. VIII.

 OF THE FUNERAL SERVICES PERFORMED FOR KING CHARLES VIII. OF FRANCE, AT
 AMBOISE, PARIS, AND ST DENIS.


After the decease of king Charles VIII. whose soul may God pardon! a
very solemn funeral service was performed at Amboise, in the church of
St Florent, by the reverend cardinal the lord John Peraule, assisted
by many prelates, great lords, and other persons. There were immense
numbers of tapers and torches, and great alms were distributed. When
this service was over, the king's heart was carried for interment to
the church of Nôtre Dame de Clery, near to that of his late father.
The body, with the representation of his figure over it, was borne
in sorrowful pomp to the church of our Lady in the fields, in the
suburbs of Paris, where it was watched all night by some of his most
confidential friends.

On the morrow morning, a grand procession came out of Paris, consisting
of all the clergy with their crosses, the four orders of mendicant
friars, the members of the court of parliament and of the other
courts of justice, the provosts, sheriffs, and inhabitants dressed
in mourning, to the church of our Lady in the Fields,--where were
waiting the great lords, officers, pages of honour, and others, to the
number of more than seven thousand persons, clad in mourning, with
hoods,--and, according to the usual ceremony, conducted the body to
the cathedral-church of our Lady in Paris. There were four hundred
torches, ornamented with escutcheons of three flowers de luce, carried
by four hundred poor men, dressed in black cloaks and hoods. A solemn
funeral service was performed in the church of Nôtre Dame; after which,
the body was carried with the same ceremonies through Paris to the
abbey of St Denis, where another service was solemnly performed for the
deceased, and presents of money given to all the assistants in making
the offerings at the mass, and great alms distributed to the poor.

When the accustomed ceremonies had been finished, the body of king
Charles was interred in the sepulchre that had been prepared for him;
after which there was a grand dinner given to all the assistants in
honour of the late king, to whose soul may God graciously grant his
pardon! Amen.




CHAP. IX.

 OF KING LOUIS THE TWELFTH.


On the 23d of May, in the year 1498, Louis duke of Orleans, son to the
late duke Charles, was consecrated king of France, in the same manner
as his predecessors had been, in the cathedral of Rheims. He was the
twelfth who had borne the name of Louis, and the fifty-fifth king of
France.

At this ceremony at Rheims were the twelve peers of France, or their
substitutes. For the duke of Burgundy appeared the duke of Alençon; for
the duke of Normandy, the duke of Lorraine; for the duke of Guienne,
the duke of Bourbon; for the earl of Flanders, the lord de Ravenstein;
for the earl of Champagne, the lord Angillebert of Cleves; for the earl
of Toulouse, the lord of Foix. Almost the whole of the french nobility
were present at the ceremony, which was solemnized in the usual mode to
that of former kings, by the cardinal of St Malo, archbishop of Rheims.

Immediately after, the king made knights of his order of St Michael
the lord de Taillebourg, the lord des Pierres, lord de la Gruture, the
lord de Clerieux. He created also knights to the amount of four score;
among whom were the lord de Myolans, sir Claude de Mont-l'Or lord of
Château-neuf, de Salazuit, and others, too numerous to name. When these
things were done, the king ordered preparations for his entry into
Paris.

On the 1st of July, the king was crowned in the church of St Denis,
after the manner of his predecessors, kings of France. On the morrow
he made a triumphant entry into Paris, and supped at the palace. When
all these solemnities were ended, each person withdrew to different
places, as ordered by the king. The first who made any opposition to
him was the lord de Vergy,--but the war was soon ended in Burgundy.

The duke de Valentinois, said to be the son of pope Alexander VII.[12]
arrived at Lyon on the 18th of October, and made his public entry into
that city. The king had given him the county of Valentinois[13],--and
he was now come to France to conclude his marriage with the daughter of
the lord d'Albret. This duke was also a cardinal; but he had left that
dignity behind him, and appeared in secular clothes with the utmost
pomp and grandeur.

The 2d and 3d of December, the wind was so high at Lyon that the
greatest alarm was caused by it; and the custodium, in which the hosts
were kept, on the high altar, in the church of the Cordeliers, was
burst open, owing to a broken pane in the window, and the sacred wafers
blown all about the church, to the great scandal of devout persons. It
happened somewhat before eight o'clock in the morning.

This year, the king gave the princess Jane of France the duchy
of Berry; and, for the benefit of the realm, he espoused, by a
dispensation from pope Alexander VII. the widowed queen of France, Anne
of Brittany,[14] which was of the greatest public utility.

In the course of this year 1499, the head of St Bonaventure was
deposited, in a very rich shrine of silver, in the church of the
Cordeliers at Lyon,--and a most solemn procession was made on the
occasion by the friars of the convent. On the 10th of June, in this
year, the king made his public entry into Lyon, which was very
magnificent. The streets were hung with tapestries,--and many fine
mysteries were represented in the squares. He was very anxious to
recover possession of the Milanese, and had sent thither a large
army, which, within fifteen days, reconquered Milan, on the 4th of
September. Duke Ludovico was in the town, and narrowly escaped being
taken, by quitting the place in disguise. The town of Alexandria della
Paglia[15], having shown much hatred to the French, was plundered, and
the greater part of it destroyed.

When the king heard of the capture of Milan, he left Lyon, giving
orders to the lord de Bersac to destroy all the benches and awnings
before the doors in that city. He made his public entry into Milan, and
regulated its government.

On the Friday before All-souls-day, in this year, the bridge of Nôtre
Dame, at Paris, fell down, which was a heavy loss; and the king sent
thither John de Doyac to superintend the immediate construction of
another.

The year 1500 was a grand year of jubilee at Rome, celebrated by pope
Alexander VII. and attended by great numbers. There would have been
more, if, on the 3d of January, duke Ludovico Sforza had not, in
person, regained Milan, by the aid of a considerable body of Germans.
He won the town through the treason of the inhabitants, who surrendered
themselves to him; but the French fought valiantly, and kept possession
of the castle, whence they battered the town.

Several Frenchmen, going to the jubilee at Rome, were murdered at the
inns on the road,--which being discovered, justice was done on the
perpetrators by burning their houses, with their inhabitants, to serve
for examples to all others. The duke of Milan, Ludovico Sforza, gave a
ducat to every one who brought him the head of a Frenchman. The count
Gayache and his wife now came to France; he was brother to the late
Galeas Visconti.

On the 19th of March in this year, the queen of France made a second
public entry into Lyon, the streets being hung with tapestry, and
several beautiful mysteries represented. About eight days after, a
number of prisoners of war were brought before the king, at Lyon, for
having broken their oaths, at which the public greatly murmured.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 12: This was the notorious Cæsar Borgia,--a worthy son of so
worthy a father!]

[Footnote 13: Valentinois,--a county on the Rhône: Valence is the
capital.]

[Footnote 14: Her fate seems to have destined her to marry those who,
to obtain her, were forced to be divorced. Charles VIII. was betrothed
to Margaret of Flanders, and Louis XII. was married to the daughter of
Louis XI.]

[Footnote 15: Alexandria della Paglia--is about 38 miles from Milan.]




CHAP. X.

 DUKE LUDOVICO SFORZA IS MADE PRISONER BEFORE NOVARA, AND CARRIED TO
 FRANCE.


On Thursday before Palm-Sunday, the French in Italy acted with such
vigour that duke Ludovico fled from Novara with one hundred horse,
abandoning his army and artillery in that town. When the french
captains approached, a burgundian leader, called the captain of the
Yotiers, came out of Novara and surrendered himself and men to them.
The bailiff of Dijon went into Novara to practise with the Swiss in the
pay of the duke of Milan (about four thousand in all), who only asked
for payment of what was due to them. In regard to the Lansquenets, they
knew not how to act; for the Swiss in the king's service would not show
them any mercy, although their captains did all they could that matters
might be settled without effusion of blood.

There were in Novara twenty thousand combatants; eight thousand
Lansquenets, four thousand Swiss, eight hundred Burgundians, and the
rest Lombards. In addition to these, a reinforcement of fifteen hundred
men were on their march to join them, and within a mile of Vercelli,
not including those in Vigeue.[16]

Shortly after, Ludovico returned and marched his army out of Novara,
and encamped them near to the French; but God, knowing the usurpation
and wickedness of Ludovico, inspired the French with courage to defend
themselves, when attacked by him. Notwithstanding the duke of Milan
thought himself certain of destroying the French, the matter ended
without blood being spilt, and without a battle. It was said, that the
Lansquenets, refused to fight against their countrymen; and likewise,
that the duke had not paid his men their arrears, which made them
unwilling to serve him. On the other hand, the French were determined
on battle; but when they marched to charge the milanese army, it
surrendered to them without striking a blow.

The duke of Milan, observing this, disguised himself in the frock of
a cordelier monk, and, by mixing with his men, thought to escape;
but the lord de Ligny and the lord de la Trimouille made such good
arrangements with their army, it was impossible; for they ordered
the whole of the milanese force to pass under the pikes, so that the
duke was discovered, made prisoner, and put under the guard of the
French in Novara, which place had thrown open its gates. The lord
Jean Jacques[17] was present at this conquest, for he had always
been faithful to the king. The duke had in his pay an astrologer or
necromancer, in whom he put great confidence; but his astrology was of
no avail to prevent him being made prisoner.

According to agreements entered into with the milanese army, they were
allowed to depart in safety with their arms and baggage,--but the
duke and his artillery remained with the French. The lord-cardinal of
Amboise was then at Vercelli, and vowed the king under the protection
of our Lady des bonnes nouvelles.

Intelligence of this success came to the king at Lyon, the vigil of
Palm-Sunday, which rejoiced him exceedingly; and bonfires were made in
the streets, for joy that the French had been victorious. Immediately
after, news was brought that the duke of Milan was a prisoner, which
caused the rejoicings to be repeated by all ranks of persons in Lyon.
The children of the duke were sent into Germany.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 16: Vigeue. Q. Vigevano.]

[Footnote 17: The lord Jean Jacques. Trivulce, a Milanese, marquis of
Vigevano, governor of Milan, captain of one hundred lombardy men at
arms and of two hundred archers, king's lieutenant of the french armies
in Italy. He was present at the battles of Foronuovo and Aignadello,
and held great and honourable employments under Charles VIII., Louis
XII., and François I. He was made marshal of France in 1500, died in
1518. He was uncle to Theodore Trivulce, governor also of Milan, and
marshal of France.

See Brantome, vol. ii. des Vies des Hommes illustres étrangers.]




CHAP. XI.

 THE CARDINAL ASCANIUS, BROTHER TO THE DUKE OF MILAN, IS TAKEN
 PRISONER, AND CARRIED TO FRANCE.


The cardinal Ascanius, brother to the duke of Milan, was in that city
when he heard of the duke being a prisoner: he instantly departed
thence, with six hundred horse and some artillery, accompanied by the
higher nobility of Milan. He had also with him a considerable body of
Estradiots; and the commander of the whole was count John, brother to
the marquis of Mantua, who intended to march for the Bolognese,--but
it was said, that he was met by a venetian captain, of the name of
Soucin Bienson[18], with a body of troops, who attacked the cardinal.
At this unexpected onset, the cardinal cried out, 'Qui vive?' and was
answered, 'St Mark and France!' The battle lasted four hours,--and the
venetian captain was severely wounded, with many of his men,--but when
the cardinal, who was in armour, saw the fortune of the day was against
him, he fled to a castle called Rivoli, which was immediately besieged
by the Venetian.

To make short of this matter,--the cardinal lost many of his men, and
the brother to the marquis of Mantua was ransomed. With this venetian
captain was another called Charles des Ursins. A milanese captain, of
the name of Badin, was made prisoner, with the abbot of Senselles,
and four viscounts,--and upwards of a hundred thousand ducats were
taken, without including the baggage. The cardinal, astonished to find
himself besieged in this castle without provision or money, entreated
the captain to ransom him, which he refused,--so that he surrendered
himself on the sole conditions of having his life spared, and of being
given up to the king of France.

The captain would have carried him a prisoner to Venice,--but the
seneschal of Beaucaire, the lord de Montoison, and the chief justice
of Provence, who had gone thither to receive the cardinal, prevented
it. The Venetians also, knowing that the cardinal was an enemy to the
king, that he had been taken on the king's territories near Piacenza,
and wishing likewise to be on good terms with France, had the cardinal
delivered into the hands of the before-named persons.

The inhabitants of Milan, on their duke and his brother the cardinal
being made prisoners, opened a negotiation, for the surrender of their
town, with the cardinal of Amboise, lieutenant for the king.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 18: Soucin Bienson. Q.]




CHAP. XII.

 THE INHABITANTS OF MILAN ARE BRIBED INTO SUBJECTION.


On the 17th of April, which was Good Friday, in this same year,
the inhabitants of Milan, acknowledging the great crimes they had
committed against the king of France, their duke, most humbly besought
the reverend father in God the lord George d'Amboise, cardinal-priest
of the apostolical see, lieutenant-general for the said king, that
he would be pleased (after having granted some small sums for their
relief, to assist them in paying their fine, and also to save them
from the pillage and destruction which the army was ready to inflict
on them) to come to the duke's palace in the city of Milan to receive
their submissions, which they were determined to make publicly in
acknowledgment of their misconduct, and to entreat the clemency of the
king, on payment of such a fine as their means would admit of.

This reverend cardinal acceded to their request, and came to the palace
called La Court-vieille, whither arrived in procession all the nobles,
burghers, tradesmen and inhabitants, preceded by little children
dressed in white linen, and bareheaded, having a large crucifix, and
the great banner of our Lady, borne before them.

The lord-cardinal being seated on the throne prepared for him in the
great court of this palace, and surrounded by many of the king's
counsellors and captains, master Michael Touse, doctor of laws, and
town-advocate, ascended a rostrum that had been there erected, and made
the following harangue:

'Unworthy as I am to ascend this rostrum, my most reverend and most
illustrious lord-cardinal, I am very anxious to have it remembered,
and thus publicly to express the complete submission and devotion
my countrymen, the people of Milan, as well as myself, feel toward
our sovereign lord and duke, the most Christian king of France;
and although I know my own incapacity to express their wishes,
notwithstanding my earnest desire so to do, yet, as a good citizen, I
could not refuse their requests to undertake it,--and I will accomplish
it to the best of my abilities.

'Among all the cities and towns of Italy, Milan, without doubt, must
be considered as the principal, when governed with justice by an
upright lord, as all good and loyal citizens have desired. Since God
the Creator, has been pleased to place them in the hands of the most
Christian king, their legitimate lord, they cannot wish for a better
nor a more powerful prince: their duty is to persevere in the fidelity
and loyalty which they have sworn to him when he received them with
such benignity and humanity. It may be said, that he had reintegrated
the citizens to their country, and their country to the founder; for
the French had founded and built the city of Milan,--and the country,
to this day, retains the name of Gallia Cisalpina. But, alas! we
have sadly displayed the instability of our tempers, and committed
the crimes of treason and rebellion without any reason for so doing;
for neither the king our lord nor the deputies he sent to govern us,
have done any things that ought to have displeased us, or make us
discontented. In regard to our lord himself, we have always found him
full of humanity, affection, and clemency; and in regard to the lord de
Luson, who had been appointed our chief justice, we cannot accuse him
of any improper acts,--for he ever received us kindly, and heard our
complaints attentively, doing justice to all parties, like as a good
father would to his children.

'In like manner, the lord Jean Jacques, who has ruled us without
distinction of persons, or the smallest partiality, punishing rather
his own people than ours, just as those excellent Romans, Brutus and
Torquatus, put to death their children for the good of their country.
He also has afforded us all necessary support. The lord-bishop of Como
and others of the family of Trivulce have acted in a similar kind
manner to us. We feel the more beholden to the lord Jean Jacques,
because knowing, as he did, the wicked intentions of many of the chief
exciters to the late rebellion, he attempted to gain them over from
their intentions by gratuities and honours, rather than dip his hands
in the blood of his countrymen. He preferred also retiring into the
castle to destroying the town by fire and sword, as perhaps strict duty
would have forced him to,--and from thence he departed, to return with
so much the greater glory. The preservation of the town from ruin is
solely owing to his prudent conduct: a superior victory to any achieved
by arms, seeing that Ludovico Sforza and almost all the king's enemies
are become prisoners. The cardinal Ascanius and others attached to his
party were, by God's merciful providence, induced to leave the town,
when they might otherwise have injured it by obstinately holding out
against the troops of our legitimate lord. The inhabitants, therefore,
are greatly indebted to God and the king, who has kindly overlooked
their faults, and not punished them according to their deserts.

'To check the fury of his victorious army, the king has been pleased to
send you, my lord cardinal, hither, with full powers to act according
to your discretion; and this you have done with such prudence that you
have saved the town to the king,--for which we, our children, and our
successors, shall be ever beholden to you.

'We also thank my aforesaid lord the bishop of Como for his good
recommendations of us to you, and for the means he has taken for the
preservation of his country.

'Since, most reverend father in God, you have been pleased, out of your
bounty and clemency, following the kind will of our lord the king, to
grant to us, the inhabitants of Milan, this public audience, they have
commissioned me to make, in their name, the following requests.

'In the first place, that it may be your good pleasure, when you
shall return to the king, to recommend us most humbly to his good
graces,--and to assure his majesty that the people of Milan will never
again rise in rebellion to his power and authority. They somewhat
resemble St Peter, who, having denied God the Redeemer, had afterwards
such grief for his sin that he was more ardent and determined in his
service than ever, continually supplicating mercy for his crime. In
like manner, most reverend father in God, and in the name of the king
our lord, do I, on my bended knees, for myself, the nobles, burghers,
and the inhabitants of Milan, beseech you to pardon the rebellion
perpetrated by us, which was contrary to the usual custom of the
Milanese, celebrated for their fidelity and loyalty.

'Secondly, most reverend father, in respect to the expenses the king
our lord has been put to in countermanding the troops sent hither to
punish us for our ill conduct, we have promised to pay the sum of
three hundred thousand crowns: fifty thousand on the 12th of this
month, fifty thousand on the 1st day of May, and the remaining two
hundred thousand at his pleasure. We beseech you to intercede for us
to his majesty, that he would be graciously inclined to remit payment
of the balance of the two hundred thousand crowns,--for it will be
impossible to raise so large a sum without totally ruining the town.
Its whole wealth consists in merchandize, and in cloths of silk and
woollen,--and should so large a sum be withdrawn from trade, all these
works must stop, to the utter ruin of the city and duchy of Milan,
which depends so much upon it. The duty of a king is to enrich and not
impoverish his subjects.

'Thirdly, we most humbly supplicate, that you would dismiss all the men
at arms from the duchy as speedily as possible, that the fruits of the
coming harvest may be preserved for the use of our lord's subjects.

'Fourthly, we beseech you, that all persons may be restored to the
offices they before enjoyed.

'And, lastly, that since, out of your great mercy and wisdom, you
have been pleased to separate the principal instigators of the late
rebellion from the more peaceable inhabitants of the town,--and that,
through the mercy of God, the cardinal Ascanius and the chiefs of that
party are now, for the welfare of the country, detained prisoners,--we
beseech you to use your interest with the king our lord, that such
provisions be made to prevent them henceforth from troubling the city
and duchy, as they have lately done, and put us again in danger of
losing our lives and fortunes, whence we have been relieved by the
merciful bounty of the king our lord.

'We assure you, most reverend father in God, and most noble lord, that
we are determined to remain faithful to our sovereign prince in body
and soul; and, by granting us our requests, you will never again hear
of any disturbances or factions in this town,--for the inhabitants
will, henceforward, be united in his service, as experience shall
prove. We have full confidence that your benignant goodness will do
every thing, in regard to us, becoming the race whence you descend,
which will be agreeable to God, and worthy to be engraved on marble,
as a perpetual memorial of your wisdom, and to the glory of your name:
all of which I and the people of Milan now assembled here, again on our
bended knees, beseech you to grant.'

Master Michael having finished his harangue, the lord-cardinal of
Amboise consulted the marshal of Trivulce, the bishop of Luson[19],
chancellor of Milan, the lord de Neufchatel, and others of the king's
counsellors, and ordered master Michael Ris, doctor of civil and canon
law, and counsellor to the king in his court of parliament of Burgundy,
and in the senate of Milan, to make a reply, which he did in manner
following.

'Misertus est Dominus super Ninevem civitatem; eo quod pænitentiam egit
in cinere et cilicio.' My lords and gentlemen of the Milanese, the
very reverend father in God and most noble cardinal here present, as
lieutenant general for the king in this duchy, has more attentively
listened to your humble propositions and requests than your demerits
deserved. That his bounty and mercy may be more manifest, he has
ordered me to lay before you your great and inexcusable rebellion,
which his excellency would willingly have done himself could he have
addressed you in your own language. I am, therefore, employed to do it
by his command. I must, therefore, remind you, that on the day when
you swore fidelity to the most Christian king, I then addressed you by
his orders, and exhorted you to remain firm in your loyalty to him,
whence you would derive great honour, and by acting contrary inevitable
evils and disgrace would follow. I am now commanded by the most noble
lord-cardinal, here present, to explain your great disloyalty and
infidelity, that the exceeding clemency and pity of the king, our lord,
may be the more apparent.

'Your crimes and your demerits are so enormous, O Milanese! that no
punishments can be adequate to them,--and they are deserving of a
similar punishment from the king as the Romans inflicted upon the
Samiens, as related to us by historians: 'Ita ruinas urbis diruerunt ut
hodie Samus in ipsa Samo requiratur.' Or one equal to what Archila[20]
king of the Goths inflicted on the Romans, whose marks are now visible
on the walls and buildings of Rome. Or what Alexander did to the
Thebans. It may be seen in numerous histories, that for much smaller
crimes, Charles the great, king of France, and the emperor Frederick I.
punished most severely this city of Milan.

'To make your ingratitude more public, you have allowed that the most
Christian king is your true and legitimate lord, to whom you owe love
and obedience, according to the laws of God and man; for the wise
regulation of the Spartans says, 'Populum in obsequia principum,
principes ad justitiam imperatorum infirmabit.' In addition to the most
Christian king being your natural and lawful lord, he has conferred
upon you numberless benefits: he came in person to deliver you from
slavery,--not out of a disorderly ambition to gain kingdoms, but
from the pity he felt for you as subjects of duke John Galeazzo, your
first duke, whose most excellent daughter, the princess Valentina, was
his grandmother. He recalled Justice to your country, which had been
banished thence. He secured to you your lives and properties, which
before no one could call his own. He allowed you the liberty to marry
your children as you should please, which before this could not be
done; for a father could not marry a daughter, nor a mother a sister,
but according to the will and appetite of the lord. Offices which were
temporary he made perpetual. He abolished all pillories, concussions,
and exactions.

'Besides these and numberless other benefits that he showered upon you,
you were bounden by your oaths of allegiance to be faithful unto him:
nevertheless, many of you, even when taking these oaths, were plotting
to deceive him. All of you, ye Milanese! forgetful of the salvation
of your souls and honour, and regardless of the danger into which you
threw your wives, your children, and your town, have conspired against
your true lord in favour of a tyrant, quitting the first of kings in
Christendom for a mean fellow of low birth,--a most potent prince for
one as poor in courage as in wealth and friends. Had I the powers of
language to display the extent of such a crime, I should be incapable
to do it under two days; but your own consciences will make you more
sensible of it than I can,--and you may apply to yourselves what is
written, 'Populus dure cervicis,' when you committed that base act of
recalling your Ludovico in opposition to your true lord.

'What was the consequence? Did he not instantly seize all the effects
of private persons, and not only their wealth but even the crosses,
chalices, and jewels from the churches? What was said of Cambyses, king
of Persia, may be said of him, 'Difficile enim erat ut parceret suis,
qui contempta religione grassatus etiam in Deos fuerat.' Although from
so great a crime many may attempt to exculpate themselves, yet I do
not see how they can well do so, for it would have been easy at first
to have resisted such treason: nor can one in Milan excuse himself
for the joyous reception given to Ludovico, as if he had been a god
descended from heaven on earth. The people of Milan assisted the lord
Ludovico with money and men. Feasts and entertainments were every where
displayed to welcome his arrival, and for his short-lived victories
when he gained Novara.

'Observe now, O Milanese! how strongly the justice of God, the Creator,
has been made manifest, and the great power that it has pleased Him to
invest the king our lord with: for when you thought that you had done
every thing by gaining Novara, at that moment you lost the whole, and
your idol, the lord Ludovico, carried away a prisoner,--so that what
was said of the Persians may be applied to him, 'Servit alteri cui
nuper mediolanum serviebat.'

'O Milanese! notwithstanding your enormous offences, the great fountain
of mercy of our good king has not been dried up by your ingratitude
to him: and the uncommon benignity of his lieutenant general, my lord
cardinal, has been fully shown to you, from his respect and reverence
to this day, on which it pleased our Lord to suffer an ignominious
death on the cross for our salvation. He, in the king's name, pardons
your lives, your honours, and your property, exhorting you, at the same
time, to be more careful, henceforward, not only to avoid committing
similar offences but to avoid even the being suspected of them: for
should you ever relapse again into rebellion, you will be punished
with such severity the remembrance thereof shall endure to the latest
ages of the world. By acting as loyal subjects towards your lord, your
town and country will be daily improved, and you will live happy and
contented; for it must be a great satisfaction to live under a true and
legitimate prince.

'With regard to the requests you have made to my lord cardinal, you
will deliver them to him in writing, and he will return you such
answers as shall content you. It must, however, be understood, that
from this pardon all the principal actors and instigators of the late
rebellion are excepted.'

When this harangue was ended, all the children passed the cardinal in
procession, crying out 'France, France! France and mercy!'

On St George's day, the queen of France set out from Lyon, to go to St
Claude, with a very handsome company. Before she returned, she stood
godmother with the prince of Orange,--for the princess had, at that
time, been brought to bed of a son.

On the 2d of May, the lord Ludovico was brought to Lyon. He wore a robe
of black camlet, after the fashion of Lombardy, and was mounted on a
small mule. The provost of the royal household, and the seneschal of
Lyon, went out to meet him, made him a prisoner in the king's name, and
confined him in the castle of Pierre-en-Cise. Great numbers of people
were collected in the streets to see him pass. The king was then in
Lyon.

The 12th of May, the marriage of the lord de la Roche, a baron of
Brittany, was announced in Lyon, with the princess of Tarente, daughter
to don Frederic of Naples. On this occasion were many justs, and
other entertainments, at which were present the queen, her ladies and
damsels,--and the wife of count Galeazzo was with the queen; but the
marriage did not take place until the 18th of May, at the church of St
Croix, near to that of St John. Tournaments again were exhibited on the
Grenette, and gave great satisfaction[21].

The lord Ludovico was, by orders from the king and council transferred
from the castle of Pierre-en-Cise, on the 14th of May, to the castle of
Loches, near Bourges. On the 24th of the same month, the lord de Ligny
returned from Lombardy to Lyon, when the king sent out a large party to
meet and welcome him.

The cardinal Ascanius Sforza was on the 17th of June, the vigil of
Corpus-Christi-day, brought prisoner to Lyon, and confined, where his
brother had before been, in the castle of Pierre-en-Cise; but he
afterwards found such favour with the king that he had all France for
his prison.

The lord-cardinal of Amboise and the lord de la Trimouille arrived at
Lyon, the 21st of June, from Lombardy, and brought with them the lord
Jean Jacques de Trivulce and his lady to France.

About the end of July, pope Alexander VII. was struck by lightning, at
Rome, and much hurt; but, recommending himself to God and our lady,
he was cured, and ordered a solemn procession, which he attended
in person, and granted a full absolution to all who assisted. This
happened, as said, on the vigil, or on the day preceding it, of the
feast of St Peter. The same day the king and queen of France left Lyon
for Troyes in Champagne, to meet an embassy from Germany that was
expected there.

On St Anne's day, the 26th of July, the king of Yvetot[22] died at
Lyon: he was buried in the church of Sainte Croix, near to that of St
John.

The 28th, on a Sunday Morning, the last arch but one of the bridge over
the Rhône, at Lyon, near to Bechevelain, fell down: the wall and the
other arch remained,--but it could not be crossed without great danger,
and by going along the top of the wall.

This year, the Swiss made war on the king's territories,--on which
account his Swiss-guards returned home, but the war was soon put an end
to.--About St Simon and St Jude's day, M. de Bordeaux, archbishop of
Lyon, died, and was succeeded by François de Rohan, son to the marshal
de Gié.

The king of France, about this period, sent a doctor of divinity
from Paris to La Vaupute[23], to convert the inhabitants from some
fantastical opinions they had imbibed,--but he failed of success.

Near Christmas, the river Saone was frozen as high as Mâcon, which
prevented any corn and other victual coming to Lyon, and raised the
price of bread very high. On St Thomas's day, the Rhône suddenly rose
in the afternoon, and higher than was ever known in so short a time.

In the year 1501, the bishop of Amiens, a native of Burgundy, died at a
place called Arbois[24], and was succeeded by the bishop of Nevers.

A jubilee took place, this year, in France, for the support of a war
against the Turks,--and a tenth was raised, from all benefices, for the
same purpose.--The archduke Philip and his consort came, in the course
of the year, to Paris, and declared themselves friends to the king.
They went thence into Spain, where the archduchess was brought to bed
of a son.

A large body of infantry, with great stores of salted provision, were
ordered to Naples; and the king and queen went to Lyon, to see these
troops march through that city. The wife of duke Réné of Lorraine
came to Sainte Claude, with her son, and thence proceeded to wait on
the king and queen at Lyon. Her son remained at the court, and had a
pension; and on the mother's returning to Lorraine, the king presented
her with a white palfrey, most richly caparisoned in crimson velvet,
with knotted cord-work in embroidery.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 19: Luson. Q. Lausanne?]

[Footnote 20: Archila. Q. Attila?]

[Footnote 21: As I do not understand the expressions in the original, I
shall transcribe them.

'Derechief on feit jouste en la Grenette. Les gentils-hommes qui
joustoient _à cheval de bois et lisses de cordes couvertes de drap de
soie qui estoit une chose si mignonnement faicte que merveilles_ et
tres joyeuse à voir.']

[Footnote 22: King of Yvetot. Yvetot is a small burgh in the country of
Caux, six leagues from Rouen. Clotaire I. king of France, having killed
Gautier lord of Yvetot, as a compensation erected it into a kingdom.
--See La Martiniere's or Baudrand's Geographical Dictionaries.]

[Footnote 23: La Vaupute. Q. Vault-de-Puis-de-Sacs? a village in
Burgundy.]

[Footnote 24: Arbois,--in Franche Comté, celebrated for its vineyards,
38 leagues from Lyon.]




CHAP. XIII.

 THE KING OF FRANCE SENDS TROOPS TO RECONQUER NAPLES, WHICH IN A SHORT
 TIME IS WON,--AND FREDERICK, STYLING HIMSELF KING THEREOF, COMES TO
 FRANCE.


The king was very anxious to recover his dominions in Naples, and, for
this purpose sent thither a considerable force by sea and land. The
king's lieutenant-general, the lord d'Aubigny, was so diligent, on
his arrival, that he soon won the town of Naples. Frederick, calling
himself king of Naples, was then in the town; for, after the decease
of the duke of Calabria, he claimed it as his inheritance. Seeing all
resistance vain, he consented to meet the king of France, to make
arrangements respecting his claim; for he was unwilling to remain the
king's enemy, seeing that it was impossible for him to resist. Some of
his children, however, were carried away secretly to the king of Spain.

The king of France received the news of the capture of Naples, and of
Frederick, the 8th of August, when at Lyon, where great rejoicings,
with bonfires, and solemn processions, were made on the occasion, to
render thanks to the God of all victories.

On the feast of our Lady, in September of this year, the convent
of the Celestins at Lyon took fire, and nearly the whole of it was
destroyed. The fire began in the chimney; but the convent was soon
afterwards rebuilt, handsomer than before. The same day, friar John
Tisserant, an Observantine, of whom mention has been before made, died.
On All-souls-day, don Frederic arrived at Lyon, from Naples, and was
conducted further into France.




CHAP. XIV.

 THE CARDINAL OF AMBOISE MAKES HIS PUBLIC ENTRY INTO LYON, AS LEGATE TO
 FRANCE.


Sunday, the 7th of October, the lord-cardinal of Amboise made his
public entry into Lyon, having been appointed legate from the holy see
to France. His entry was very sumptuous and handsome: the streets hung
with rich tapestries, and several allegorical mysteries represented in
those streets he passed through. The populace were greatly rejoiced at
his arrival, as he had established a peace among the Christian princes,
which was proclaimed at Lyon on Saturday preceding Christmas, when
bonfires were made in all the squares.

About this time, the lady Margaret[25] was married to the duke of
Savoy, and made her public entry into Geneva in the course of the month
of December.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 25: The lady Margaret--of Austria, daughter to the emperor
Maximilian, and widow to John son to Ferdinand the catholic king of
Spain.]




CHAP. XV.

THE FRENCH, AFTER THE CAPTURE OF NAPLES, MAKE WAR ON THE TURKS.


The year 1502 was the jubilee for a croisade against the Turks. It
was, as said, celebrated throughout Christendom to excite every prince
to take up arms on the occasion. But there were divisions among them;
and all failed in their engagements excepting the king of France, who
showed himself deserving of his title of most Christian king.

After the conquest of Naples, he ordered his troops to make war on
the Turks by sea and land,--for they, having declared war against the
Venetians, had landed troops near to Venice. The french army were eager
to advance to the conquest of Constantinople, under the command of
the lord Philip of Ravenstein; and they had undertaken the siege of
the town of Metelino, under a promise of pay, and of being victualled,
made by the Venetians to the king of France. They failed in the last
article, for the french army was five days without provision; and what
was worse, the Venetians allowed the Turks to march through part of
their territories, who fell on the French, killed numbers, and made
thirty-two prisoners,--for whose release the pope issued his pardons to
obtain the necessary sums, as is specified in the bull. By these means,
the french army was ruined; but had the promises made to the French
been kept, they would soon have conquered the greater part of Turkey.

Good-Friday, this year, falling on the feast of our Lady in March,
pardons were fully granted at the church of our Lady at Puys, in
Auvergne, where such multitudes attended that a melancholy accident
happened, by the falling down of a wall from the crowd pressing against
it, which killed numbers, and wounded more. Several also perished from
the great pressure.

This year, a marriage was concluded between the king of Hungary and
Anne of Candale, daughter to the lord of Candale of the house of Foix.
She soon after made her public entry into Lyon, where several splendid
mysteries were represented, and thence continued her route to Hungary,
where the marriage was consummated, and they had a fine family of
children.

About a fortnight before St George's day, the prince of Orange died,
and was succeeded by his infant son.

Not long after this, the king of France went to Lombardy, and made his
public entry into Genoa, the inhabitants having placed themselves under
his dominion. The town made him many rich gifts,--and having staid
there some time, he returned to France in September. About this period,
Réné bastard of Savoy was driven out of that country, and took refuge
with the king of France, to the great displeasure of the duke and
duchess of Savoy; for Réné had revealed divers machinations that were
going forward to the prejudice of the crown of France. Shortly, a suit
was instituted against the duchess, to recover some places which the
duke had given her, that belonged to Réné by purchase.

While the king was in Dauphiny, the duke and duchess of Savoy visited
the queen at Lyon, but made no public entry: they staid only four or
six days, and went back to Savoy a little before the king's return.

Shortly afterward, the general of the order of cordelier friars came to
France, to establish a reform, and to make them follow the regulations
of the Observantines,--for the king would have it so, as he knew them
to be too worldly inclined, and that it was better to have ten good
monks than two thousand vicious ones.

On the vigil of St Martin's clay, the wife of don Frederic arrived in
France, with some of her children and attendants.

In the year 1503, the picture of our Lady of the Cloister, which had
been in the cloister of the cordeliers at Lyon was removed into the
church, and placed in the chapel of St Francis. This painting was so
large that the wall was broken down to admit it into the chapel, where
it now is most richly decorated.

About the beginning of Lent, the king's palace at Dijon was burnt down,
by the firing a culverin up the chimney to clean it; the king soon
afterwards rebuilt it with greater magnificence.

The 21st of April, when the king was at Lyon, he made a general
abolition of a variety of tolls and imposts that had existed for
a hundred years, without any legal sanction,--with orders not to
re-establish them, under severe penalties. This was contained in
letters patent he granted to the merchants who trafficked on the Rhône
and Saone, and other navigable rivers falling into them, from the
town of Pontarlier, above Auxonne, to the sea,--and also to those who
trafficked by land through France, the Mâconnois, Lyonnois, Languedoc,
and Dauphiny. By these letters, all obstructions to the navigation,
such as wears, milldams, and the like, were ordered to be instantly
removed, excepting such as may have been particularly erected by the
king.

The french army at Naples gained ground daily, and had nearly
conquered Sicily, so that all trembled before them.




CHAP. XVI.

 THE ARCHDUKE MAKES HIS ENTRY INTO LYON.--ANOTHER HERETIC.


The archduke Philip made his public entry into Lyon the 23d of March,
and it was very handsome. He came from Spain; but before he entered the
king's territories, he demanded that five or six of the princes of the
blood should be sent to his country, as hostages for his safety during
his stay in France. This was done, for the king had no evil intentions;
but the archduke had made the above demand imagining that he might be
somewhat inclined to be suspicious of him.

The populace were rejoiced at his coming, because he was charged to
make peace between the kings of France and Spain, which he did; and it
was proclaimed while the king, queen, and their court were at Lyon, on
the 4th of April. The peace included, beside the kings of France and
Spain, the archduke, the king of the Romans and their allies.

The archduke on leaving Lyon, went to Bourg en Bresse in Savoy, where
he met the duke, and his sister the duchess of Savoy.

About the 13th of April, the lord John de Horne, bishop of Liege,
waited on the king at Lyon, on account of a quarrel that had taken
place between him and the lord de la Marche, which they had mutually
referred for the king's decision, and he made peace between them.

The archduke had not been long at Bourg en Bresse before it was known
that the king of Spain had landed a large army at Naples, and had
instantly attacked the French unexpectedly,--for they understood that
they were at peace with Spain. Notwithstanding this, a severe conflict
took place,--and the duke of Nemours was killed treacherously. The
Spaniards conquered the town of Naples, in contradiction to the oath
their king had so lately made to observe the peace. It was said that
pope Alexander VII. had supplied the Spaniards with provision. The
lord d'Aubigny retired into Calabria with a few of his men; but had
the French been supported, they would have prevented the Spaniards
succeeding in their enterprise. It was likewise reported, that some of
the French had joined the Spaniards, having an understanding with the
king of Spain,--but this perhaps was discovered afterwards. The lord de
la Trimouille was, in consequence, sent to Naples as lieutenant-general
for the king; but he was seized with so grievous a malady on his road,
he was forced to return to France.

In this year, an extraordinary event happened at Paris. A young
scholar, twenty-two years old, a native of Abbeville, whose parents
were of worth, and much respected, went on the feast of St Louis,
to the holy chapel in the palace, while mass was celebrating at an
altar on the right hand. When the priest was about to consecrate
the host, this scholar snatched it out of his hands, and ran away
with it into the court fronting the exchequer-chamber. Perceiving
that he was pursued, he tore the wafer into pieces, and flung them
on the pavement. When, taken, he was confined in the prison of the
Conciergerie,--but no exhortations could make him repent. Upon this
his parents were sent for, who were much grieved at his conduct, more
especially for his obstinacy and malice,--and the mother died in Paris
of grief.

The father renounced his son for a heretic, and wanted to put him to
death with his own hands. When brought before the court of parliament,
he was asked of what religion he was; and replied, Of the religion
of nature. It was said that he had frequented the company of some
scholars from Spain, who had fled. A general procession was made to
the holy chapel, to offer up prayers to God that the scholar might
be converted,--and a sermon was preached, while he was present, by
an eminent doctor. The court of parliament finding him obstinate,
condemned him to be dragged from prison to the place where he had
thrown down the host; then to be put into a tumbril, and have his
wrist cut off, and carried to the pig-market to be burnt. He was
accompanied all the time by three doctors, who earnestly exhorted him
to repent,--namely, master John Standun, a Cordelier, and a Jacobin:
the first never left him until dead, notwithstanding he continued in
his obstinacy to the last.

From the time this impiety had been committed, a canopy of cloth of
gold was supported over the spot where the host had fallen, with two
burning tapers beside it. The pavement was taken up, and carried to
the holy chapel, with such parts of the wafer as could be found, to be
preserved as relics, and the place repaved.

Toward the end of August, in this year, pope Alexander VII. died.
The king was then at Mâcon, and immediately ordered the cardinal of
Amboise, the cardinal Ascanius Sforza, then a prisoner in France, the
cardinal of St George, with other cardinals, to repair to Rome, for the
election of a pope.

About nine or ten o'clock of the Monday, before Michaelmas-day, the
whole arch of the bridge over the Rhône at Lyon fell down.

The cardinal of Sienna, nephew to pope Pius II. was elected pope, and
took the name of Pius III., but did not live more than eight or ten
days after his exaltation. During that short space, he had already
shown how very much he was indisposed against the French. He was the
hundred and sixth pope.

On Wednesday preceding St Luke's day, the lord Peter of Bourbon died,
while the king was at Mâcon: he was much bewailed, for he had ever been
true and loyal to the crown of France, and was an able counsellor.

The 19th of October, died pope Pius III. at Rome, who, as I have said,
did not outlive his election more than eight or ten days,--and the
cardinals made another election.

The French at Naples slew very many Spaniards,--and had they been
properly supported, they would have driven them thence, for the lord
d'Aubigny evinced much valour and prudence.




CHAP. XVII.

 THE CARDINAL OF ST PIETRO AD VINCULA ELECTED POPE.


The cardinal of St Pietro ad vincula, legate of Avignon, and by name
Francis de Savona[26], was elected the hundred and seventh pope of
Rome, and took the name of Julius II. He was nephew to the late pope,
Sixtus IV. and had accompanied king Charles of France at the conquest
of Naples. After his election, he made his nephew cardinal of St Pietro
ad vincula, and legate of Avignon.

The french army before Saulse[27], in the county of Roussillon, was
badly conducted by some in whom the king had great confidence; for it
was so well equipped, wonders were expected from it. The commanders
might have taken the castle and the garrison, on allowing their
captains to march away in safety; but although many were for it,
the majority were against them. The castle was mined to its very
foundations, and the army was so strongly encamped it could not
be hurt; but the king of Spain, by dint of money, as it was known
afterwards, blinded the eyes of the commanders, to the astonishment and
vexation of all loyal Frenchmen when it was discovered.

The commander in chief, the marshal de Rieux, a Breton, marched away
to Narbonne, to the great discontent of the French, as the camp was
left without a leader. Every one behaved with the utmost courage, and
raised the siege, carrying off the artillery and baggage without loss
in their retreat. However, had all behaved as they ought to have done,
conformable to their engagements with the king, in a short time they
would have made great advances into the enemy's country, considering
the fine army of the French.

The lord de la Roche-pot was killed, when before Saulse, by a cannon
shot: it was a great loss, for he was a good and valiant knight, and
the king and whole court were much grieved at it.--The french army in
Naples not only kept its ground, but even made some conquests.

On Christmas-eve, in this year, the lord Louis of Luxembourg, lord of
Ligny, died, about twelve o'clock at night at Lyon, and was very much
regretted by the king and all who knew him, for he was universally
beloved.

The 3d day of July, in this year, died Pierre cardinal of Aubusson[28],
grand master of Rhodes, which he had governed for twenty-seven years:
during the early part of which, Rhodes was attacked by the Turks with
an immense army: but he and his knights made so gallant a defence, he
was victorious, and the Turks left upwards of forty thousand dead: the
rest saved themselves by flight, to the great vexation of all Turkey,
in spite of their cries, 'Mahoun, avenge us!'

The sultan, finding this army defeated, uttered a horrid cry, to the
alarm of his attendants, and swore to march another to Rhodes, and have
ample revenge; but while he was employed in making preparations, he
died. The grand master of Rhodes detained the next heir to the sultan
a prisoner for thirteen years, contrary to the will of many, and then
delivered him up to the pope, who, in return, sent him a cardinal's
hat. He had those fortifications repaired that had been damaged by
the Turks, and then converted the Jews in the island to Christianity.
He formed alliances with all the princes in Christendom, and did an
infinite deal of good. He was succeeded by Emeri d'Amboise, brother to
the cardinal of Amboise, legate to France, who instantly left France
for Rhodes, to oppose the Turks, who were continually carrying on a
warfare against the Christians.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 26: Francis de Savona. This must be a mistake: his name was
Julius della Rovere. He was born at Albizale, a village near to Savona.]

[Footnote 27: Saulse. Q. Sault? a small territory adjoining Roussillon.]

[Footnote 28: Aubusson. He was grand prior of Auvergne, and descended
from the ancient viscounts of la Marche. Pope Innocent sent him the
cardinal's hat, for having delivered up to his guard Zimim brother to
Bajazet.]




CHAP. XVIII.

 THE SOPHI OF PERSIA MAKES WAR ON THE TURK USSON CASSAN[29].


The grand master of Rhodes received on the 7th of December, in the
year 1502, intelligence from Armenia and Persia, that one called Sophi
Christian, or Red Bonnet of Armenia, had assembled an army of forty
thousand men, to enable him to revenge the death of his father by
Usson Cassan, a Turk, and to recover all the Sophines who had been
sent prisoners to Turkey. Having considered the iniquity of the grand
Turk, and his infamous conduct to these Sophines, he set out from his
country, called Adanil, twelve days journey from Tauris, accompanied by
only one hundred warriors, and arrived near to Arzian[30], a town of
Usson Cassan, whose friendship and alliance he besought on account of
his mother, sister to Usson Cassan, pretending that he was waiting the
arrival of his attendants. But he disguised his feelings of injury from
the grand Turk, who detained his Sophines in abject vassalage: however,
within a fortnight, he was joined by about sixteen thousand men, with
whom he entered Arzian by force, and put to death all the inhabitants,
both great and small.

Among other acts worthy of remembrance, in all the mosques, or temples,
of the Turks, he had the horses and camels tied up as in a stable,
to show his contempt for them, and had them afterwards razed to the
ground. There had been a temple of the Christians which the Turks
had destroyed; but Sophi had it immediately rebuilt, and handsomely
restored. The army of Sophi continually increasing, he advanced into
the province of Firnam, which belonged also to Usson Cassan. Usson
Cassan perceiving that Sophi was subjugating his country, and the whole
of the Turks in this province, amounting to more than fifty thousand,
assembled his army, and offered battle to Sophi, who defeated him
completely, and made him prisoner. He entered victoriously the town of
Sarda, where he staid three months, and thence advanced to Tharabe, a
town of Usson Cassan, which instantly surrendered.

As he approached the country of Sultania, he was met by the children
of Usson Cassan, with an army of twenty-five thousand men. Sophi gave
them battle, and defeated them. One of the children was killed in the
combat: the others were taken prisoners, and put to a disgraceful death
by cutting them in pieces. Not one of their army was permitted to live.

The city of Tauris, seeing the great power of Sophi, and that he had
destroyed their prince and his children, surrendered to him without any
defence,--and he remained there with his army some time. The citizens
of Tauris, observing the great prudence and wisdom of Sophi, put him
in possession of all the treasures of Usson Cassan. He thence departed
to a large town called Lingia, three days journey from Tauris, and to
another called Passy, the last town of Usson Cassan.

Sophi, finding that he had now conquered and submitted to his obedience
the whole of the dominions of Usson Cassan, and established order
every where, returned to Tauris, the capital of the country. He was
continually followed by his mother, with a numerous attendance of
slaves, for he was much beloved by her; and after a short stay at
Tauris, she sent ambassadors to the grand Turk, to remonstrate with
him on his shameful conduct to the Sophines,--ordering him to set them
at liberty, and also to put on the red bonnet, after the manner of the
Sophines, otherwise she would make him feel the power of her son.

The grand Turk detained the ambassadors in Constantinople, for he
suspected that Sophi would invade his country of Natolia; and in
consequence, he assembled a large army near to the town of Angora[31],
and commanded all in Pera[32] to hold themselves in readiness to
bear arms against Sophi Christian or Red Bonnet. They were, however,
refractory, and refused to obey, showing more willingness to surrender
themselves to Sophi. The Armenians say, that Sophi does not esteem the
grand Turk a button,--for he has an army of ninety thousand men, well
armed, without including his own countrymen from Armenia, who daily
follow him. All this information was brought to the king of France,
when he was at Morestel[33] in Dauphiny, in the year 1503.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 29: I cannot make out this chapter to my satisfaction. In
the 'Art de Verifier les Dates,' I find, that in the year 1501, which
nearly answers to the date in the chapter, Schah Ismael Sophi I., &c.
the restorer of the sect of Ali, in Persia, when only 14 years old,
assembles a large army of Alides, conquers Tauris from Alvand IV.
successor of Uzun Cassan, and obliges him to fly to Diarbeker, where
he dies in 1502. Schah Ismael gains Bagdad in 1510, putting to flight
Morad Beg, son to Alvand, and in the following year conquers Khoristan,
&c. In the year 1514, Selim I. emperor of the Turks gives him battle
and defeats him on the plains of Chaldéron, and takes the town of
Tauris. Sophi dies aged 38, &c.]

[Footnote 30: Arzian. Q. Erzerum, or Erivan?]

[Footnote 31: Angora,--a town in Natolia: Bajazet was defeated near to
it.]

[Footnote 32: Pera,--partly a suburb to Constantinople. I believe it
was then possessed by the Genoese.]

[Footnote 33: Morestel,--election of Vienne.]




CHAP. XIX.

 A GREAT MORTALITY FROM THE UNWHOLESOMENESS OF THE SEASON.--OF THE
 DEATHS OF MANY PERSONS OF NOTE.


In the course of the year 1504, a truce was concluded between the kings
of France and Spain, touching the county of Roussillon: nevertheless,
the Spaniards that had been garrisoned in Saulse embarked secretly for
Naples. It was said, that the king of Spain had bribed some of the
French (of which they were afterwards accused), and by this means he
had conquered Naples.

The lord of Aubigny and the lord of Alegre, the principal leaders of
the french army, were made prisoners; and great numbers of their men
perished, more from want of food than in battle, for there was no great
effusion of blood. The lieutenant of the lord of Ligny maintained his
post in the territories of that lord's deceased wife,--and the French,
notwithstanding the spanish force, made several good prisoners, who
were exchanged for the lords of Aubigny and of Alegre.

This summer was exceedingly hot and dry, which prevented the corn from
filling; and the harvest was very poor in the Lyonnois, Dauphiny,
Auvergne, Burgundy, Savoy, and other countries. From the month of
March, the farmers and peasants, foreseeing the season would be
unproductive, were in great distress, and made processions to different
churches in all the villages around: general processions were even made
by the peasants to the churches in Lyon, where the inhabitants and
monks gave them bread and wine in abundance.

In these processions, the young women were dressed in white linen, with
bare feet, a kerchief on their heads, and a taper in their hands: the
boys were clothed also in white, bare headed and bare footed: then came
the priests, followed by persons of both sexes, the women singing from
the Litany, 'Sancta Maria! ora pro nobis,' and then the whole cried
aloud for 'Mercy!'

The parishes of Lyon made similar processions to the church of our Lady
of the island, a french league distant from that city. On the last
day but one of May, the body of St Just was brought from the suburbs
into the city of Lyon, which no man living had before seen done; and
his shrine was carried in procession, with chaunting and singing, from
church to church. On the following day, the jaw bone of St John the
baptist, which had never before been taken out of the church of St
John, was carried in procession to the church of the Augustins.

Eight days afterwards, it rained; but the drought was soon as great as
ever. The monks of Nôtre Dame de l'Isle, attended by the inhabitants of
many villages, brought her image, and that of St Loup, in procession to
Lyon, which had not been done in the memory of man. This was on the 7th
of June; and at the same time was brought thither the shrine of Saint
Hereny, prince of the nineteen thousand martyrs.

Processions came to Lyon four and five leagues distant; and the
inhabitants of several villages were from five to six days wandering
about the fields, from one place to another, without returning home.
In short, every body appeared so miserable, the hardest hearts must
have wept on beholding this great desolation of the people, and have
quitted all amusements to assist them.

In the month of September, there appeared in the river Saone, above
Lyon, a prodigious quantity of small eels, of the size of a man's
little finger, but no one dared to eat of them. Great sickness now
prevailed; and on the 19th of September Philibert duke of Savoy died at
Pont d'Ain, not without suspicions of poison. He was succeeded by his
next brother: the other was bishop of Geneva.

In the year 1505 died the lady Jane duchess of Berry, and was interred
in a chapel, within the castle of Bourges she had founded and endowed.
From St John's day of last year until that feast in this, the season
was most sickly, and every thing very dear. Wheat sold at Lyon from
twenty-six to twenty-seven sols the bichet[34]; and from the scarcity
in the country vast numbers came from the villages to Lyon to seek
charity. Some left their houses empty, others their wives and children,
and the women their husbands and children. Great part of them died,
although every person who had wherewithal gave them food; for alms were
as abundantly bestowed in Lyon as in any city of its size.

A pestilential disorder now raged, which carried off immense numbers in
the hospital, both rich and poor; and this pestilence seemed to be felt
every where, for, in the mountains of Savoy, several died of it, and of
hunger, so that many farms were this year uncultivated.

During Lent, the king of France had the bones of his late father,
Charles duke of Orleans, removed from Blois to Paris, and interred in
the chapel of the Celestins at Paris, which the dukes of Orleans had
founded. Every kind of honour was paid to them during their removal,
and at their re-interment,--and it was a magnificent spectacle.

About this time, the king was taken with so serious an illness it was
thought he must die. His nobles and courtiers were much grieved:
many of them made divers vows and pilgrimages; and processions were
ordered throughout the realm, to offer up prayers to Jesus Christ for
the king's recovery, which was granted. While he lay speechless, he
had a vision, which he related; and it was so marvellous that I firmly
believe it to be more a miracle than any thing else. A short time
after his recovery, the king solicited the pope to grant a jubilee for
his kingdom of France, and other parts under his dominion, without
any expenses. On the 26th of June, the feast of St Peter and St Paul,
a great procession took place, in which the host was carried as on
Corpus-Christi-day, when the king, knowing how earnestly his people
had prayed for the restoration of his health, would not show himself
ungrateful, but, to reward them, solicited of the pope for this free
jubilee.

In this year, don Frederick of Naples died, to whom the king had
behaved with the utmost liberality touching his claims on Naples.

In the year 1506, died, Isabella queen of Spain, who, during the wars
of Granada, had shown great valour and prudence. The king of Spain
was afterwards married to the sister of the lord of Foix, through the
interference of the king of France, who, in consideration of the match,
made some agreements with the king of Spain respecting Roussillon and
Naples.

A war now took place between the duke of Savoy and the Valoisiens, but
it was soon made an end of.--In the month of July, a general chapter
of the Cordeliers was held at Rome, which had not been done since the
death of their founder St Francis. It was caused, as said, by the
reformation of the Cordeliers in France, which dissatisfied several of
the fraternity,--and it was in this chapter determined by the pope,
that there should be only two modes of living among them; that such as
had been reformed should remain so: consequently, all the convents of
Cordeliers in France follow the rules of the Observantines.

At this time also, a general chapter of the knights of Rhodes was
holden at Rome, and many knights were drowned in coming thither, from
tempests at sea.

On the 18th of July, the feast-day of St Pantaléone, a general pardon
was granted to all repentant and confessed sinners, who should bequeath
money or lands to the churches founded by the knights of Rhodes. This
was done on account of a great victory the new grand master, brother
to the cardinal of Amboise, had gained over the Turks. He had defeated
their whole army, which was worthy of remembrance.

On Ascension-day, in this year, the count of Angoulême[35], the second
person in France, was betrothed, at Tours, to the princess Claude of
France, only daughter to Louis XII. by Anne of Brittany, which caused
great feasts and rejoicings throughout the kingdom.--The reverend
father in God the lord Francis of Rohan, son to the marshal of Gié, and
archbishop of Lyon, made his public entry into that city on the 14th of
August. Many mysteries were exhibited in the streets through which he
passed, and they were all hung with tapestries. On the following day,
the least of the Assumption of our Lady, he chaunted the high mass at
the cathedral of St John in his archiepiscopal robes.

This year, the duke of Gueldres made war on that part of Guelderland
dependant on the archduke.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 34: Bichet,--a measure of uncertain quantity,--from 70 to 54
pounds weight of corn,--of 36 pounds of chesnuts.]

[Footnote 35: Count of Angoulême,--afterwards Francis I. king of
France.]




CHAP. XX.

 THE DEATHS OF THE ARCHDUKE AND OF THE QUEEN OF HUNGARY.


The archduke Philip, during his residence at Burgos in Spain, died,
on the 25th of September, in this year 1506.--The queen of Hungary
died also on the feast-day of our Lady, in August, having been brought
to bed a fortnight before of a son, named Louis. The marquis of
Brandenbourg was proxy for the king of France, at his christening. She
left a daughter likewise, three years of age,--and both children lived.

In Lombardy, there was a nun of the order of Jacobins, who, like to St
Catherine of Sienna, had, every Friday, marks on her hands and feet
similar to the wounds of our Saviour, that ran blood, which appeared to
all who saw it very marvellous.




CHAP. XXI.

 THE POPE, BY THE ASSISTANCE OF THE FRENCH, GAINS BOLOGNA.


Pope Julius II. weighing in his mind that the whole of the territories
of Bologna were the patrimony of the church, made preparations to
reduce them to his obedience. This city and territory had been usurped,
and held by force for some time, by sir John de Bentivoglio. The pope,
considering that there was no prince in all Christendom so well able
to afford him support in this project as the king of France (that firm
pillar of the church, who had been every where victorious), made him
acquainted with his claims and intentions of recovering the bolognese
territories.

The king, eager to serve the holy church, ordered a large detachment
of men at arms to join the pope's forces from the Milanese, for him
to use at his pleasure. The pope's army was besieging Bologna on the
side toward Rome,--but when joined by the French, it was besieged
on all sides. This took place in the month of October. The French,
stationed on the side toward Modena, behaved very gallantly, and won
Castel-franco, which was plundered because the garrison would not
surrender. The pope's army gained another castle,--and both armies
showed so much courage, the Bolognese were astonished and frightened:
they found themselves closely besieged, and that it would be impossible
for them to resist the pope and the king of France. Finding their
situation desperate, they surrendered themselves to the pope, having
driven sir John de Bentivoglio out of Bologna, who, as I have before
said, held the town by force, although it lawfully belonged to the pope.

The pope offered up thanksgivings to God the Creator for his success,
and chaunted high mass most devoutly, on All-souls-day, in the church
of St Petronilla in Bologna.




CHAP. XXII.

 OF THE DAMSEL TRIVULCE.


About this time, there resided a young lady in the Milanese, who had
been taught the rudiments of grammar at seven years of age, and was so
earnest in her studies that, at fourteen, she was eloquent to a degree
that astonished all who heard her.

She was descended from the noble family of the Trivulces. Her father,
called John, was an able knight and good scholar, as were all of his
family. Her mother's name was Angela, a noble lady of the race of the
Martinengois. In praise of this young lady, the verse of Prosper may
be well applied,--'Naturæ sequitur semina quisque suæ.' Her mother was
not a learned lady, although full of virtue; but the daughter was so
devout and eloquent, in her prayers, that she seemed more angelic than
human; and if she continues to abound in such virtues, and to live thus
sanctified and devout, she will deservedly be worthy of her reputation
of a saint.

At twelve years of age, she became a great disputant, and was
invited into the companies of the most learned, as well secular as
ecclesiastic,--among whom were the bishop of Lausanne, an eminent
scholar, her uncles the bishop of Cumense[36] and Francis Trivulce,
of the order of franciscan friars, when several disputations took
place,--and great praises were given to this damsel. She understood
philosophy, history, and different sciences, was mistress of Seneca,
Aristotle, and Pietro of Ravenna. Whatever she saw or heard at any of
the places she visited, she related the whole to her father, on her
return home, as exactly as if it had been written down.

She was skilful in poetry, and one day composed so long a poem her
master was surprised at her talent. She became soon expert in the
greek tongue, and wrote many letters, in that and in other languages,
that were greatly admired by all the learned to whom they had been
addressed. She was most patient in adversity, making a joke of it: in
short, every thing she did or said was miraculous, and unlike to a
human being. When marriage was spoken of to her, she replied, that she
would never marry a man whom she did not know to be as pure in virtue
as herself.

The Genoese, acting according to their accustomed treachery, forgetful
of the crimes they had committed, and been pardoned for by the king,
now rebelled against him, and chose for their doge one called Paul
Noyus[37], who had been a silk dyer. The king, hearing of this,
resolved to march in person against them, and reduce them to his
obedience, notwithstanding the great preparations the Genoese had made
for resistance. They had, among other things, erected a bulwark they
thought impregnable; but some bold french adventurers having secretly
mounted this bulwark, the hearts of the Genoese failed them, and they
fled into the town. They now offered to surrender themselves to the
king's mercy, who, from his uncommon benignity, and wish to avoid the
effusion of human blood, pardoned them, and entered the town with his
whole army, where he had a magnificent reception. Their lately-elected
doge, Paul di Nove, was taken at sea by a french bark, when making his
escape, brought back to Genoa, and beheaded. From this time forward,
it was publicly proclaimed, that the populace should not shout 'Adorne
Fregose[38]!' which they had been accustomed to do before this last
reduction of the town.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 36: Cumense. Q. Como?]

[Footnote 37: Paul Noyus. Paul di Nove.]

[Footnote 38: Fregose. Q. Fiesco?]




CHAP. XXIII.

 OF THE LEAGUE OF CAMBRAY, FORMED BY THE CARDINAL OF AMBOISE, BETWEEN
 THE POPE, THE EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN, THE KING OF FRANCE, AND THE KING
 OF SPAIN, AGAINST THE VENETIANS.--THE KING OF FRANCE DEFEATS THE
 VENETIANS AT AGNADELLO.


The king of France, about this time, through the means of the cardinal
of Amboise, concluded a treaty at Cambray between the pope, the
emperor, the king of Spain, and the lady Margaret, governess of the
low countries. This treaty, although of no long duration, was the
cause of the deaths of two hundred thousand men, as you will hereafter
see, through the treachery of the confederates, in various battles and
engagements that took place; and what is worse, we of the present time,
unless God shall be pleased to apply a remedy, are still suffering from
the effects of this unfortunate treaty.

The king thought to obtain by it a lasting peace and alliance with the
adjoining princes; but he was deceived, as was apparent at the time
of the affair of Peschiera, against the Venetians; for he alone, of
all the confederates, took the field, crossed the Alps, and advanced
to Milan. He thence marched his army, and what is worthy of remark,
had all the bridges broken down he passed over, to show that flight
would be needless. His first conquest was the castle of Trevi. He then
marched his army to Peschiera, near to which was Agnadello, where
the battle was fought. Five days after the camp had been formed at
Peschiera, the Venetian army was attacked, and completely routed,
chiefly by the great exertions of the lord of Bourbon, who fought
manfully: there was great slaughter. The confederates never thought
that this could have been accomplished by the french army alone. Indeed
the Venetians would not believe it until the count de Pitigliano, who
had fled with the reserve, convinced them of its truth. This battle
took place on the 14th of May, just six days after the king arrived in
the camp, and it was certainly very fortunate. Thus the war lasted but
five days; for after such a victory, there was nothing to prevent the
king obtaining all his demands.

I repeat, that this success was very fortunate, considering how
advantageously the enemy were posted, the number of strong places
in their possession, and the strength of their armies; for they had
enow to oppose the confederates in the field and to guard their
strong holds. In their camp were more than seventeen hundred men at
arms, light cavalry to the amount of nine thousand five hundred,
and twenty-two thousand infantry well armed, with twenty pieces of
large artillery, much superior to what the king had, and also the
best captains in all Italy to command this army, particularly sir
Bartholomew d'Alviano, the chief, taken prisoner as he was rallying a
body of infantry.

Numbers of the most renowned of the venetian captains were made
prisoners this day, and sent to different strong castles in
France,--their banners to the church of St Denis. Not more than two
hundred were slain of the king's army, while full fifteen thousand
fell on the side of the enemy. After the battle, the king ordered the
dead to be buried, and a chapel to be erected on the spot, endowed
sufficiently for the celebration of daily masses for the souls of those
who had died in a state of grace. It was not long afterward before
those towns which the Venetians had usurped surrendered to the king's
obedience,--such as Bergamo, Brescia, Crema, Cremona, that had formed
part of the duchy of Milan.

The pope, in like manner, recovered those places that had been taken
from the church, namely, Ravenna, Imola, Faienza, and Forli. The
emperor Maximilian regained from the Venetians his towns of Verona,
Vicenza, and Padua,--but this last he did not keep long. Whether
through negligence or fear, he had never dared to come to the king's
camp, notwithstanding his repeated promises: the king, however, gave
him a large body of men, under the command of the lord de la Palisse,
to regain the city of Padua,--and it was long besieged, but nothing
effectual was done at last.

The king of Spain also regained the towns of Brundusium, Tarentum, and
others, of which the Venetians had possessed themselves.

When all this had been done through the fortunate victory of the king
of France, who had supported the pope like a true son of the church,
and had so essentially served him in the restoration of Bologna by the
expulsion of Bentivoglio, and in various other ways,--notwithstanding
all these proofs of his friendship, pope Julius, at the instigation of
the Venetians and others, formed an alliance against him, and, having
joined his arms with those of Venice, took Udina and Mirandola; which
last he restored to John Franciscus Picus, who styled himself the true
lord of it.

To return to the king of France: after his victory over the Venetians,
he went to Milan, where a magnificent triumphal entry was prepared
for him, after the manner of the ancient Romans. Brilliant cars, full
of the handsomest and best dressed ladies in Milan, went out to meet
him,--and the people greeted him with acclamations, comparing him to
Cæsar, for having conquered and reduced to his subjection those who
had been feared and dreaded by all the world before.

The king, having had so handsome a reception in Milan, went thence
to Savona, where he was met by Ferdinand, who had come thither with
a numerous fleet of galleys for the purpose. The king of France
received him and his queen with much kindness, and they made good cheer
together. They confirmed their peace by dividing the eucharist between
them at the holy sacrament; but it lasted not long, notwithstanding
this ceremony, as you will hereafter see. There are many who make a
good sale of their consciences and promises; and one of them, instead
of the host, ought to have swallowed a burning coal,--for numberless
creatures have paid dear for perjuries of which they were innocent, and
had no concern with.




CHAP. XXIV.

 A WAR BETWEEN POPE JULIUS AND THE KING OF FRANCE, ON ACCOUNT OF THE
 DUKE OF FERRARA.--A COUNCIL OF THE CHURCH ASSEMBLED AT THE INSTANCE OF
 THE EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN AND THE KING OF FRANCE, TO THE DISSATISFACTION
 OF THE POPE.--BOLOGNA TAKEN BY THE FRENCH.


About this time, the town of Mirandola was valiantly reconquered by
the French, and the town of Udina delivered up to the king of the
Romans. The marquis of Mantua was taken prisoner by the Venetians,
and carried to Venice, whence, some time after, he easily obtained
his liberty. A fresh war now commenced between the pope and the duke
of Ferrara, an ally of France,--for which reason, the king left the
count Gaston de Foix, whom he had lately created duke of Nemours, his
lieutenant-general in the Milanese, who did marvellous feats of arms
during his command in Italy.

The lord-cardinal of Amboise, on his last return from Italy, fell
sick at Lyon, and died there. His loss was great, as was afterwards
known, although at the time some thought the contrary; but they were
unacquainted with his many virtues, and the good use he made of his
talents,--for during the whole of his administration, he advised his
master with such wisdom that the people were never over-taxed. Whatever
wars king Louis may have carried on in Italy, the taxes were never
raised above their usual rates; but when the enemy attempted to bring
the war on the french territory, it became absolutely necessary to
increase them.

The king was, not without foundation, called 'the father of his
people,' notwithstanding that title may have been given him during his
life through flattery, and the worth of other kings debased, the more
to exalt his own. It is impossible to say too much of a virtuous man
in his absence; but when present, to praise him smells strongly of the
love of lucre.

The cardinal-legate having lain in state for a short time, the body
was embalmed, put into a leaden coffin, and carried to Rouen for
interment. The king came thence to Blois, accompanied by the queen,
then far gone with child of a daughter, as it turned out afterward,
whom the king had vowed to the holy St Réné, a bishop of Angers,
whither he made a pilgrimage with the queen when she recovered. The
young princess was christened Renée,--and the lord Jean Jacques de
Trivulce stood godfather with the king.

About this time, the Portuguese made some discoveries on the island of
Oran[39], on the coast of Africa, where they met savages of a blackish
colour, with countenances as if branded with hot irons, thick lips,
black and coarse hair, resembling in thickness that of a horse. They
had no beard, nor appearance of any, or of hair on any parts of the
body but on the head and eye-brows. Their boats are made of the bark
of trees, and so light, a man can with ease carry one of them. Their
bows are bent with the sinews of wild beasts: their arrows of cane,
headed with a sharp stone or piece of fish-bone. They know not the use
of bread or wine, nor the value of money, and crawl on the earth like
beasts, feeding on raw flesh, and covered with skins for clothing. They
live part of their time in the sea. Two of these natives were brought
by some Normans to Rouen, and presented to the king; but they did not
live long, nor did the others that had been brought to Europe.

But to return to my former subject: a general council was demanded
by the emperor, and king of France, to the great discontent of the
pope. He had broken his faith, by instigating the king of Arragon, the
republic of Venice, and others, to commence a new war, quitting the
chair of Saint Peter for the car of Mars, the god of war, displaying
in the field of battle his triple crown, and sleeping in watchtowers.
God knows what a sight of crosses, mitres, and sacred banners, were
fluttering in the plains; and the devil took good care not to come
near,--for benedictions were given most abundantly, and at the cheapest
rates.

The war commenced against the duke of Ferrara, ally to the king,
when many engagements took place, sieges were made and raised, for it
was continued without interruption of winter and summer. Bologna was
besieged by the duke of Nemours, who acted as viceroy in Italy, and
the Bolognese fled before him, so that he soon reconquered that town,
as you shall hear. About this time, pope Julius excited the Swiss to
invade the duchy of Milan, which they did, and advanced to the walls
of that city, committing every sort of mischief, particularly to a
monastery of nuns, whom they ravished, and plundered the convent of all
within it.

The lord de Conti, like a valorous knight, hastened to their relief,
and did wonders; but he was surrounded, and fell, which was a great
pity.--Soon after, the duke of Nemours made an agreement with them to
return home, on receiving a sum of money,--which they accepted and
retreated, to return again to seek more money.

The inhabitants of Brescia were now (unfortunately for them) advised
to quit the french interest, and put themselves under the dominion
of Venice, for which they severely suffered. In like manner, those of
Bergamo revolted to the Venetians,--but the castles of both places
remained in the hands of the French, under the command of able
captains, who gallantly served the king, especially in his italian
wars, for which some of them were but badly recompensed.

The council[40] before mentioned was first held at Tours, then at
Lyon, and then referred to a general council at Pisa, where were many
cardinals, archbishops, bishops, abbots, priors, and other prelates
of the church. There were likewise some very learned theologians, and
canonists, to whom this affair would afford matter of discussion.
Several essential points were determined on in the different sessions
of this council; but, for weighty reasons, the council was transferred
to Milan, and thence to Lyon, where it remained.

The french army suffered much at the siege of Bologna, from the rigour
of the weather: but, notwithstanding this, they were victorious,
drove out of the town the pope and his archbishops, and entered it as
conquerors.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 39: Oran,--a town of Algiers. I should imagine this to be a
mistake for some place on the southern coast of Africa.]

[Footnote 40: The council--was held in 1510 at Tours, and attended
by all the prelates and doctors of France. Louis XII. proposed eight
questions, touching his declaring war against pope Julius II. in favour
of Alphonso duke of Ferrara, whom the pope had determined to deprive
of his dominions. The answers of the council confirmed the king in his
resolution for war.

I do not see any thing of these removals of the council in the Art de
Verifier les Dates, from whence the above is taken.]




CHAP. XXV.

 THE DUKE OF NEMOURS MARCHES HIS ARMY AGAINST BRESCIA.--ON TAKING THE
 TOWN, A GREAT SLAUGHTER ENSUES.


When the duke of Nemours heard of the revolt of Brescia, and that
the Venetians had entered the town, he instantly made preparations
to attack them, and with great diligence, marched day and night to
Brescia; for I can promise you, that the king had, at that time, an
excellent army,--and the liberal promises of the duke of Nemours urged
them on, so that they were almost immediately before it.

Those in the castle, on the first appearance of their countrymen,
opened the gate, and part of them forced their way thence in the
town. Alas! what a deluge! what cries! what lamentations of the poor
citizens! It is a great pity, and wonderful how many suffer in the
support of the quarrels of princes and great lords: however, in this
instance, they had deserved punishment, for having wantonly broken
their oaths of allegiance.

The duke of Nemours had no sooner gained the castle and palace than,
like a great warrior as he was, he entered the town, one arm bare, and
his sword on his wrist, shouting out 'France!' in which he was echoed
by all Frenchmen. The Venetians, thunderstruck, took to flight through
one of the gates, but numbers were slain[41] and made prisoners, of
whom were many of high rank in Venice, who were sent to France.

The inhabitants having attempted to defend themselves, the town was
given up to plunder; and you might have seen several french adventurers
tearing to pieces, out of spite, large bales of cloths of gold and of
silk; such merchandise might then have been bought for almost nothing.
The ladies and children made piteous moans on seeing their husbands and
fathers murdered and cast out of the windows, and all their effects
pillaged. To make short of the matter: they thought that God's whole
indignation and wrath had been poured on them; for the French treated
them with every cruelty, in revenge for the resistance that had been
made by throwing stones and beams from the tops of the houses, by which
some great french lords suffered severely. The place was completely
conquered, in spite of all that the Brescians and Venetians could do to
prevent it,--and the streets were filled with dead bodies, besides the
numbers that were slain in the open country: in the whole, there must
have been many thousands killed. Among the prisoners were sir Andrew
Gritti, sir John Paulle[42], Caufre and his son, the count Ludovico
Adanago[43], who had been the chief adviser of the town to revolt, for
which it had been treated as you have heard.

After this victory, the towns and castles in the territories of Brescia
were re-garrisoned, and provided with abundance of provision and
stores of all kinds,--and the lord d'Aubigny was appointed governor of
Brescia. The town of Bergamo also surrendered, as well as several other
places, which had revolted, and in consequence suffered great miseries.

News was brought to the duke of Nemours, that the Spaniards had left
all their heavy artillery and baggage at Imola, and were advancing,
by forced marches, into the plain, boasting that they would form a
junction with the Venetians and relieve Brescia; but I believe that,
when they learned what had passed there, they changed their intentions.

About this time, there lived in the town of Augsbourg a virgin, named
Anne, who had arrived at the age of forty years, without eating,
drinking, sleeping, or having any natural evacuations!!! by which it
may be known, that she was under the especial grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ,--and she had given herself up to devout contemplations.

Another great wonder was seen in the city of Ravenna, where a monster
was born with a horn on its head, wings of a bat, one foot like a
bird of prey, the other like a human foot! It had an eye on its knee,
and was of both sexes! It had a mark of a Y on its breast, and an
appearance of a cross, with a crescent beneath,--which signs, according
to my lords the philosophers and prognosticators, signify many things!!

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 41: Numbers were slain. Guicciardini says, about eight
thousand of the inhabitants and venetian soldiers.]

[Footnote 42: Sir John Paulle. Q. Giampaolo Manfrone and his son?
Guicciardini mentions also as prisoners Antonio Justiniano, the
Venetian governor of the town; il cavaliere della Golpe, Baldassare
di Scipione, un figliuolo d'Antonio de Pii, Domenico Busecco, captain
of the light cavalry. Count Luigi Avogaro was beheaded in the
market-place.--See Guicciardini.]

[Footnote 43: Ludovico Adanago. Q. Luigi Avogaro and his son?]




CHAP. XXVI.

 THE DUKE OF NEMOURS DEFEATS THE UNITED ARMIES OF THE POPE, THE
 VENETIANS, AND THE SPANIARDS, NEAR TO RAVENNA,--BUT IS HIMSELF SLAIN,
 AFTER HE HAD GAINED THE VICTORY AND TOTALLY REPULSED THE ENEMY.


We must now return to the wars in Italy, and elsewhere. During the
Lent of the year 1512, the duke of Nemours marched his army before
Ravenna, wherein that of the pope, the Venetians, and Spaniards were
seeking opportunities to retaliate on the French,--and they had made
great preparations for this purpose. The duke of Nemours, having had
information of this, advanced thither, accompanied by many nobles and
valiant captains, such as the lord de la Palisse, the lord d'Alegre
and his son, the lord Jean Jacques of Trivulce, the lord de Châtillon
governor of Paris, the lord de Molarc, Maugeron, La Crotte, and other
officers of renown. When he had approached Ravenna, the French
remained some time encamped from a scarcity of provision, and many
suffered by it. Perceiving that their supplies had failed, like hardy
warriors, stirred on by the eager desire of the duke of Nemours for the
combat, they resolved, on the eve of Easter-day, to offer the enemy
battle on the morrow, which was the feast of the Resurrection of our
Lord.

The French advanced boldly to the combat, having their artillery in
front, which played four hours incessantly, and did great damage to the
Spaniards, principally to their men at arms. Some Spaniards sallied out
of their camp, and the French rushed in,--when both parties met, and
two superb and bold nations might then be seen contending with courage
and earnestness for the victory. Never was heard such clattering of
swords and lances: the gallant duke of Nemours hastened forward,
fighting most wonderfully, to encourage his men; and it was for some
time uncertain which side would have the advantage,--for the Spaniards
shouted at times 'Victory! Julius, Julius!' at others, the French cried
out 'Victory, Nemours!' At length, the French made their enemies fly.

During the battle, the lord de Molarc was killed by a cannon-shot,--a
great loss to the king, for he was a valiant, and enterprising captain.
He led that day the french infantry, a most courageous and steady band.
La Crotte and captain Jacobs, who commanded the Lansquenets, were among
the first of the slain; and their loss was a heavy blow: however, both
French and Lansquenets advanced with greater courage to revenge the
deaths of their captains, and pushed on until they came to where the
baggage was, and some famished adventurers had already begun to knock
in the heads of the casks of different wines,--when, having drank
their fill, they ran away as fast as they could: not so the Spaniards,
who still held on fighting,--for I can assure you, that these spanish
troops were no way fainthearted, and there had not been so severe a
battle fought as this for a long time. May God pardon those who were
killed!

The remnant of the Spaniards and Italians that escaped wandered here
and there. Upwards of twenty of the great lords of Italy lay dead on
the field. There were many prisoners made: in the number were Pedro
de Navarre, don John de Cardona, the marquis of Pescara, Pomare,
Epinose, Castinago, John Antony Vosino, the count de Montelon, the
marquis de Betonde, the marquis de l'Estelle, the son to the count
of Consege, and others of renown. No one knew what became of the
duke du Traict,[44] who was of their company. The viceroy of Naples
saved himself by flight, until he gained the seashore, and embarked
for Naples. The marquis de la Padulla and the count del Popolo made
good a retreat before the end of the conflict, with eleven or twelve
hundred horse, as well men at arms as light cavalry, and from sixteen
to seventeen-hundred infantry, the remains of their army, and saved
themselves as well as they could.

Numbers of Frenchmen were doubtless slain, for the Spaniards fought
with the utmost bravery; and when the french men at arms returning from
the pursuit, passed over the field of battle, the wounded laid hands
on any swords near them, and, in the miserable state they were in on
the ground, cut the legs of the horses the French were mounted on.

Pope Julius was at Rome when news of this event was brought him. God
knows how he bore it, for he had been a very great sufferer in that
battle. The instant he heard it, he would have set off without delay,
fearing that the French would follow up their victory, and come to seek
him even in Rome.

After this defeat, the illustrious and gallant duke of Nemours, having
perceived a small body of the enemy that had not dispersed, like a
magnanimous prince, but too unmindful of the signal victory God had
just given him, required of the nobles and captains around him, that
they would be pleased to march with him and drive them away. Some of
them who, from long experience, knew the uncertainty of the chances of
war, remonstrated with him on being too adventurous, and that he should
remain satisfied with the success he had gained. Notwithstanding the
truth of these remonstrances, he persisted in his resolution, and said
aloud, 'Let all who love me, follow me.' Upon this, the lord d'Alegre,
his son, Maugeron, the bastard of Cliete, seeing him thus determined
and already advancing followed him.

The duke of Nemours was the first to attack this body of the enemy,
who were greatly superior in number; and the gallant prince performed
such feats of arms as astonished them, and cleared all around his horse
with such rapid and mortal blows that none dared approach him. It was
a grand sight to view so young a man displaying such extraordinary
courage. The enemy, observing how few the French were, and that no
reinforcements were coming to them, recovered their courage and
surrounded the young hero. They first killed his horse, and then fell
upon him with battle-axes, pikes, and every sort of weapon, that he,
and all his companions, died a glorious death.

This was a most heavy loss to France, for he was a magnanimous prince,
worthy to be placed on a triumphant throne in a temple of brave men.
His liberality and frankness had gained him the love of the army, who
would have followed him any where, even without pay,--and within four
months he had gained three decisive battles.

When this melancholy event was known, the lord de la Palisse and other
captains hastened to revenge his loss, and put to death the whole body
of the enemy that had slain the duke, the lord d'Alegre and the others,
without suffering one to escape. They thence marched to besiege the
city of Ravenna, which they took by storm, killed the greater part of
the inhabitants, and plundered the town: there was much confusion,
for it was almost entirely destroyed. When this was done, the french
returned to the field of the late battle, to raise the bodies of
the duke of Nemours and the other lords, to give them an honourable
interment in sacred ground. The body of that most noble prince and
viceroy of Italy, was carried in mournful triumph to Milan, from the
ground where he had fallen, to be magnificently interred becoming so
great a prince.

The body of the duke of Nemours arrived at Milan the 26th of April,
in the year 1412, preceded by all the prisoners taken at the battle
of Ravenna. The banners, guidons, and standards the French had so
valiantly conquered, as well from the Italians as from the Venetians
and Spaniards, and of the different lords who had fallen in this
battle, were borne before him, which added joy intermixed with
grief at this mournful interment. Great order was observed in the
procession,--and it was a triumphantly melancholy spectacle. The nobles
and captains were in deep mourning,--and there was no heart so hard
not to weep on seeing his body thus carried untimely to the grave. His
pages and attendants led his horses of parade and for war: his helmet
and victorious sword, as lieutenant general for the king, were borne
before the body. In short, those of his army who attended the funeral
were loud in their lamentations; for they had always found him liberal
and courteous, and never sparing of his own personal efforts in war.

The principal inhabitants and churchmen of Milan came out to meet the
body, dressed in mourning cloaks and hoods, with a blaze of lighted
torches, on which were the arms of the deceased emblazoned. The body,
surrounded by two hundred of the choicest lances in the army and a
numerous escort of infantry, was conducted, with great pomp of grief,
to the cathedral, where a most solemn service was performed for the
repose of his soul.

Think how great must have been the sorrow of the king and queen, when
they heard of this sad event at Blois, for they loved him as if he had
been their own child; and I can assert for truth, that those who had
never seen him bewailed his loss, on the reports they had heard of his
uncommon virtues and gallantry. May God receive his soul!

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 44: Duke du Traict. Q. Utrecht?]




CHAP. XXVII.

 ON THE DEPARTURE OF THE FRENCH FROM ITALY, THE SWISS TAKE THE TOWN OF
 MILAN AND OTHER PLACES HELD BY THE KING OF FRANCE.


After this battle of Ravenna, where, as well as in the preceding ones,
great quantities of human blood were shed, principally of the Italians
and their allies,--but also of the French, and of some of the noblest
families, by which many ladies and damsels in France became widows and
orphans. The generals, or at least those who had the management of
the finances for the army, imagined that, by the happy event of this
battle, all Italy was subdued, as far as Rome, if not farther, and
disbanded great bodies of infantry at the very time when they should
have sought reinforcements, to garrison the towns and castles that had
been lately conquered.

When this conduct was noticed by certain bloodsuckers and turbulent
spirits, they collected troops in divers parts, to endeavour to regain
honour by attacking the French; for, seeing them dispersed in their
garrisons, they were aware that courage, when disunited, is not so
much to be dreaded as when in a collective body. The holy father the
pope, smarting from the losses he had suffered from the French, three
times excited the Swiss-cantons to rise in arms against them, for they
had of late been neglected by the king of France. They chiefly depend,
for their maintenance, on pensions from kings and princes,--and the
pope having made the bishop of Sion a cardinal, he was an active and
able tool, by his public preachings and intrigues, to prevail on them
to comply with the wishes of his holiness. Maximilian also, having
turned his coat, was to allow them an entrance to Italy through his
territories of the Veronese and elsewhere. The Spaniards likewise
assembled from various parts of Italy; and they all advanced toward
Milan, whence the government had been withdrawn to France, so that the
poor Milanese were in despair, and knew not how to act. However, the
French having left them, they, as usual, fell in with the strongest,
and the enemy was admitted into the town. The castle was held by the
French, under the command of the lord de Louvain; and other castles
were also in their possession: that of Brescia was held by the lord
d'Aubigny.

When the French were returning from Italy, a sharp skirmish took place
at a bridge near to Pavia, between a small body of french adventurers
and the enemy, and they were inhumanly treated by the townsmen. Among
others of their villanous acts, I shall mention one. A Frenchman,
unable to keep up with the rest, was met by an inhabitant of Pavia,
who said to him, 'My friend, I love the french nation: come, I beg of
you, to my house, and I will save you from being killed.' The poor
adventurer, confiding in his fair words, followed him; but he was no
sooner within his doors than he treated him most brutally, cut off his
private parts, and thrust him into the street in his shirt, bawling
aloud, 'Here is another Frenchman!' on which numbers rushed out of
their doors, and hacked him to pieces with their swords.

There was another inhabitant of Pavia who had even devoured the heart
of a Frenchman, by way of revenge.

I am persuaded that all the evils that have befallen Italy have been
caused by their wickedness, and infamous practices similar to those of
Sodom and Gomorrah. The air would be infected, were I to recite them.
May God amend them, and all others! On the other hand, the French have
a shameful custom (which was increased when in Italy) of blaspheming
our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and our Lady, with divers indecent oaths, in
which they seem to take pleasure. God may, perhaps, have been angered
by such detestable blasphemies, and by that great vanity with which
the French are always filled, and suffered them to experience the late
unfortunate reverses, to show that from Him alone come victories and
good fortune.

The French, on leaving Italy, were in a great alarm,--and they were so
rejoiced when returned to France, they attributed it to the favour of
Heaven. Such are the chances of this world.

In this year of 1512, pope Julius, returning evil for good, was
violently animated against the French; and having partly accomplished
his wish of being the chief cause of their expulsion from Italy, died
at Rome in the ninth year of his pontificate. May God pardon him!

About this time, a truce was concluded between the kings of France and
of Arragon, for a certain space of time. Leo X. was now the reigning
pope: he was consecrated at Rome the successor of pope Julius II.
Leo was a native of Florence, of very wealthy, and renowned parents.
His father was Lorenzo de Medici, to whose family Louis XI., king of
France, had granted permission to add the three flowers de luce to
their armorial bearings[45].

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 45: I must refer the reader, for further particulars of the
french wars in Italy, to Guicciardini and other italian historians, and
to Mr. Roscoe's lives of Lorenzo de Medici and of Leo X. The grant of
Louis XI. to the Medici, to bear the arms of France, is in the appendix
to Comines.]




CHAP. XXVIII.

 OF THE WAR IN GUIENNE.--THE KING OF FRANCE SENDS SUCCOURS TO THE
 KING OF NAVARRE.--THE KING OF ENGLAND MAKES PREPARATIONS TO INVADE
 FRANCE.--A SEA-FIGHT BETWEEN TWO LARGE ENGLISH AND FRENCH SHIPS.


It was not long before a war broke out in Guienne, or rather in
Navarre; which kingdom the king of Arragon had entered, and taken the
town of Pampeluna, with others belonging to the king of Navarre, under
pretence of being heir to that crown in right of his wife, sister to
the late duke of Nemours count of Foix, slain after the battle of
Ravenna.

The good king of Navarre[46], in consequence, demanded succour from
the king of France, to recover the places he had lost. Louis XII.,
considering how faithful an ally he had always been, ordered a large
body of men at arms and infantry to his assistance, under the command
of the duke of Longueville and Dunois. This war was very expensive
to the king of France, for the army remained long without striking a
blow. In addition to this, the English, excited by the king of Arragon,
as well as by a desire to regain Guienne, which they claimed as an
inheritance, made a landing near to Roncevaux and St John Pied du
Port,--but not being able to effect a junction with the Spaniards, they
returned[47].

In the year 1513, Henry king of England, son to king Henry VII. who,
by the aid of Charles VIII. king of France, succeeded peaceably to the
crown of England after the death of Richard of York, instead of being
grateful, for such services, to the king of France, although his late
father had charged him, on his deathbed, to do nothing against that
king, if he wished to prosper, instantly on the death of his father
acted directly contrary. King Henry, equally eager with his subjects
to invade France, sent an embassy to the lady Margaret, governess
of Flanders, to obtain armour, stores, and artillery, particularly
thirteen large cannons, which he had ordered to be cast in Flanders.
These articles were immediately delivered, in return for a large sum
of angels that remained behind,--for it had been long since they had
circulated in any other country than their own.

A secret treaty was, at the same time, concluded between Henry and
the archduke,--which having secured him the aid of the Flemings,
he continued to make his preparations for the invasion of France
without interruption. He sent his fleet, under the command of the lord
admiral[48] to cruize on the coasts of Brittany, who was himself on
board a vessel of prodigious size.

The french saw this armament with sorrow, for they had not a fleet able
to cope with it; but a valiant sea-captain, named Primaugay, embarked
on board a large ship called La Cordeliere, which the queen of France
had lately built at an immense expense. He put to sea, and boldly
attacked the english admiral in the great ship called The Regent, when
a bloody combat took place. After some time, the Cordeliere set the
Regent on fire, which having gained the powder-magazine, she blew up,
with all within her.

Primaugay, seeing it impossible to save his ship, as they were grappled
together, leapt into the sea, armed as he was, and perished: it was a
pity, for he was a bold and enterprising man[49].

These two large ships were burnt; but the rest of the fleet returned in
safety to England, to report the unfortunate news to the king, who was
much vexed thereat, and not without reason.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 46: The good king of Navarre--was of so indolent a character
that his queen, a woman of high spirit, told him, 'Had _you_ been
mademoiselle Catherine, and _I_ don John, we had never lost our realm.'
Henault.]

[Footnote 47: Henry VIII. was the dupe of Ferdinand of Arragon. The
english forces landed at Guipi-coa, under the command of the marquis of
Dorset, but were never joined by the Spaniards to unite in the siege
of Bayonne. The English returned, having gained nothing but disgrace,
while Ferdinand possessed himself of the kingdom of Navarre.]

[Footnote 48: The lord admiral,--sir Edward Howard. Sir Edward Knivet
commanded the Regent.]

[Footnote 49: In Henry's Hist. of England, it is said that both ships
took fire, and perished, with all on board, to the number of seventeen
hundred men; that the rest of the fleets, consisting of twenty-five
sail English, and thirty-nine French, separated in consternation, as if
by mutual consent, without further fighting.]




CHAP. XXIX.

 THE KING OF ENGLAND DISEMBARKS WITH HIS WHOLE ARMY AT CALAIS.--THE
 FRENCH ARE DEFEATED BY THE SWISS, AT NOVARA.


When the king of England had completed his preparations, he put to
sea with his army, disembarked at Calais, and thence, with part of
it, marched strait for Flanders. Had he then been attacked, the
perplexities that ensued afterwards would have been avoided.

At the same time, the king of France had collected an army for the
recovery of the Milanese, under the command of the lord de la
Trimouille, Jean Jacques de Trivulce, sir Robert de la Marche, the lord
of Albany and others,--but the lord de la Trimouille was commander in
chief.

This army crossed the Alps, and entered Piedmont, where it halted for
the arrival of the rear and baggage, and then pushed forward toward
Novara, in which place was a body of Swiss. The French, supposing them
not very numerous, determined to attack them, which they did; but the
evening before, a very large reinforcement of Swiss had joined their
countrymen in Novara, which the French were ignorant of. A battle,
however, ensued, when the French defeated the van of the enemy; but
such numbers of Swiss now poured in on all sides, the French were
thunderstruck, and hastily retreated to Turin: some, however, of their
infantry, stood their ground, and died valiantly,--and the son of the
lord de la Marche shone pre-eminent for his valour.

The Swiss gained a considerable park of artillery, which the lord de la
Marche had brought thither, and great part of the baggage. The king
of France, on hearing of this event, ordered the remainder of the army
home, and sent part of it into Guienne, where the illustrious lord of
Bourbon had the command of an army, with many nobles and able captains
under him, to carry on the war in Navarre. He had there a fine camp,
and a variety of skirmishes took place on both sides.

The king afterwards sent the next heir to the crown, the duke of
Valois and count of Angoulême, accompanied by numbers of gentlemen,
to take the command of this army and camp, where they remained a long
time,--but nothing of importance was done, and they returned to France.
The king then sent them into Picardy to oppose the English, who were
advancing toward Therouenne. The lord de Longueville died immediately
on his return from Guienne.

In this year, there was an appearance in the heavens, visible in
Piedmont, of three suns, three moons, with various figures of circles
and bows, of different colours, and a white cross in the center. These
were terrible presages,--and I believe that it was a year of wonders.

About this time, the king sent the lord de la Trimouille into
Swisserland; but the cantons would not agree to any conference until
they should receive a certain sum of money, which was paid them. The
conferences now took place; and the lord de la Trimouille staid long
among them, giving great gifts, in hopes to gain them over to the
interests of France; but after they had received large sums of money,
they dismissed him. He returned through Burgundy, to have some of the
towns of that province put into a good state of defence, to resist the
Swiss, who had determined to attack them.

The Swiss, in consequence of the resolutions they had formed, entered
Burgundy, and committed great destruction wherever they passed. By
rapid marches, they came before Dijon, into which the lord de la
Trimouille had thrown himself; but with the few men at arms and
infantry with him, it was impossible to resist such a deluge of Swiss.
However, he ordered as many things as could be carried away or drove
off, to be brought into Dijon.

The Swiss, on coming before Dijon, saluted the town with a large train
of artillery, that battered and damaged the walls and houses; but the
lord de la Trimouille, being well advised, held a parley with some of
the Swiss leaders, and agreed to pay them down one hundred thousand
golden crowns, on their marching back into Swisserland, without doing
more damages to the country, which was executed.




CHAP. XXX.

 A BODY OF FRENCH ON THEIR RETURN FROM VICTUALLING THEROUENNE, BESIEGED
 BY THE ENGLISH AND HAINAULTERS, ARE ATTACKED AND PUT TO FLIGHT.


The king of France marched in person to Picardy, and advanced as far as
Amiens, where he was magnificently received by those of the town and
country. Thence he sent the duke of Valois, as his lieutenant-general,
to command the camp against the English, and to order whatever
measures he should think advisable for the victualling of Therouenne.

This town was then besieged by the king of the Romans, the king of
England, and a number of flemish lords, and particularly by a body of
Hainaulters, who had posted themselves in a fort near the town, and
thence battered it with heavy artillery. The garrison and townsmen
defended the place valiantly, but they were in the utmost distress
from want of provision, and a convoy was ordered to supply their
necessities, under the command of the lord de Longueville.

He executed this order punctually by throwing in all his supplies; but
on his retreat, he fell unexpectedly into an ambuscade,--for his men,
not suspecting any such stratagem, were marching very disorderly, and
amusing themselves by playing in the fields. On the enemy sallying
from their ambush, the French were panicstruck, and began to fly,
notwithstanding all attempts of their officers to prevent them. In
consequence, the lord de Longueville, the captain Bayard, the lord de
Bussy, and many more captains of renown were made prisoners, some of
whom were carried to England, and their liberty set at a very high
ransom[50].

During this time, the king of France sent orders to the governor
of Paris to have all the companies of tradesmen, and of other
descriptions, mustered. This was done, and several companies were
richly accoutred, well armed, and in uniforms. The numbers were found
to be very great, according to the report made by the commissaries who
had been sent thither for this purpose.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 50: This was called The Battle of Spurs from the French
making more use of them than of their swords.]




CHAP. XXXI.

 THE KING OF SCOTLAND ENTERS ENGLAND WITH A POWERFUL ARMY.--HE IS
 SLAIN.--PEACE CONCLUDED BETWEEN THE KING OF FRANCE AND THE VENETIANS.


While king Henry of England was engaged in his war abroad, the noble
and gallant king of Scotland invaded England with a large army, on
pretence of a claim to that crown in right of his queen, and also
from his alliance with the king of France, to make a diversion in his
favour, now he was attacked, and force his enemies to quit France to
avoid greater inconveniences.

The king of Scotland, on entering England, did great mischiefs.
A battle took place, in which very many English fell, as well as
Scots,--but the greatest loss to France was the death of the king of
Scotland, who was killed valiantly fighting. It is rare to find such
friends as will put their lives and fortunes to the chance of war in
the support of a friend, especially when absent[51].

The Scots gained the field, although numbers of them were slain,--for
as both nations had been long desirous of coming to blows, it may be
supposed that hard ones were exchanged on each side. May God pardon
those who fell![52]

On Friday, the 3d of June, in the year 1513, peace was published on the
marble table in the palace, between the most Christian king Louis XII.
and the republic of Venice, and between them and their successors for
ever. By this treaty, the gallant knights sir Bartholomew d'Alviano and
sir Andrew Gritti, with others, obtained their liberty; and the king
made them many rich gifts on their departure.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 51: James professed himself the knight of Anne of Bretagne,
queen of France, who wrote him an heroic letter to claim his
assistance, sending him, at the same time, a ring off her finger and
14,000 francs.

Andrews.]

[Footnote 52: The celebrated battle of Flodden,--of late well known
from Mr. W. Scott's beautiful poem of Marmion.]




CHAP. XXXII.

 THE TOWNS OF THEROUENNE AND TOURNAY SURRENDER TO THE ENGLISH ON
 CAPITULATION.


To return to the wars of the English in Picardy:--they were long
encamped before Therouenne, and made several attacks on it; but those
within the town showed good courage, and defended it valiantly: at
length provision again failed them, and they were forced to capitulate
for its surrender. The enemy entered Therouenne, but did not keep the
promises they had made; for they had no sooner gained admission than
they began to ill-treat and plunder the poor inhabitants, insomuch that
they were obliged to seek out another place for a habitation, which was
great pity; but this did not satisfy the enemy, for they burnt part of
the town, and threw down the walls to the ground.

We must not be astonished that the English so boldly invaded France,
particularly Picardy, considering the evident good understanding that
subsisted between them and the Flemings, who at this day raise their
hands and tell those of Tournay that they have never changed sides,
notwithstanding they had settled the chapter _de Venditionibus_,
before the English would embark. This was not handsomely done in
them, considering they had a resident lord,--and they have derogated
shamefully from their former engagements: should they, therefore, find
themselves the worse for it, they have only themselves to thank.

Shortly after the English had gained Therouenne by capitulation, they
advanced before Tournay, which was surrendered to them by the principal
inhabitants, according to an agreement among themselves, without
striking a blow[53].

The king of England and the king of the Romans, after these conquests,
returned to their own countries, leaving a garrison in Tournay. The
king of France likewise quitted Picardy, with his queen, and went to
Blois.

While the war was carrying on in Picardy, and a little before the
siege of Therouenne, an engagement at sea took place between Pregent,
a french captain, and the lord Howard, lord-admiral of England, on
the 22nd and 25th days of April. Pregent, thinking to join the french
fleet in Brest harbour, was met at sea, on the vigil of St George's
day, by a fleet of forty or fifty sail, and was instantly attacked
by two galeasses and four or five other vessels. The combat lasted
two hours, with great slaughter on both sides; but at length the
English were forced to retire, with the loss of two vessels sunk. On
the Monday following, which was the feast of St Mark, Pregent and his
fleet fell in again with that of the English, amounting to twenty or
thirty vessels, and about thirty large boats. The galley of Pregent was
attacked by two galeasses and three ships, but he fought well,--and
all on board the first galeass were killed by pikes, or drove into the
sea, excepting two prisoners, one of whom was thrown overboard.

In this combat, sir Edward Howard was killed, whose body was embalmed
to carry to England for interment[54]. The captains of the other ships,
seeing that these five vessels had not made any impression on the
galley of Pregent, whom they had courageously attacked, held a council,
and afterwards made sail, leaving the sea open to Pregent. A large
fleet had been collected at Honnefleur, to attack the king of England
as he crossed the channel, and cut off his return; but when they were
at sea, a violent storm arose that separated this fleet, and some of
the vessels were sunk.

The winter of this year was very long and severe, so that the Seine and
other rivers were frozen hard enough for carriages to pass over them
with safety; and when the thaw came, numbers of houses and mills were
destroyed by the floods.

About this time, news was brought that the Swiss had intentions
of again entering Burgundy, when the king ordered thither the
lord of Bourbon with a large force of men at arms, infantry,
and artillery,--but the Swiss did not come. This same year, the
garrisons that had guarded different places in Italy returned to
France, in consequence of the treaty concluded with the Swiss before
Dijon,--namely, those from the castle of Milan; the lord of Aubigny,
his lance on his thigh, with his garrison, from the castle of Brescia.
When these garrisons marched away, the Spaniards took possession of the
castles, which the Venetians thought had been done for them; but when
the Spaniards had established themselves securely, they chaunted to the
Venetians the Evangile des Vierges. Such are the chances of war.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 53: I believe this town was gained by a ruse de guerre. Henry
drew up before the walls a large train of what appeared battering
cannon, (but were only of wood painted, and are now shown in the Tower)
which frightened the inhabitants into an instant surrender. This is the
popular story.]

[Footnote 54: Sir Edward Howard boarded Pregent's ship, although it
was sheltered by the rocks of Conquet lined with cannon, accompanied
only by Carroz, a spanish knight, and seventeen Englishmen. Overpowered
by numbers, Howard was forced overboard by pikes, and perished in the
waves.

Andrews.]




CHAP. XXXIII.

 OF THE DEATH AND INTERMENT OF THE MOST CHRISTIAN QUEEN OF FRANCE, ANNE
 OF BRITTANY.


At the time of the arrival of the above unfortunate intelligence,
the most noble queen of France, Anne duchess of Brittany, &c. lay
dangerously ill at the castle of Blois. This was on the 2d day of
January,--and her illness so much increased that the good lady, on
Monday the 9th instant, departed this life, most devoutly, in the faith
of JESUS CHRIST, our sovereign Lord, to whom she most humbly resigned
her soul. Great lamentations and grief were shown for this loss. When
the body had been embalmed, it was put into a rich coffin, and carried,
with an immense number of lighted torches, from Blois to the abbey
of St Denis, where it was interred with the usual honours due to her
rank, and followed with the tears of all her officers and attendants.
The funeral service was solemn and magnificent, becoming such a lady,
whose soul may God pardon!

In the month of April of this year 1513, and just before Easter, a
truce was proclaimed in Paris between the kings of France and of
Arragon.




CHAP. XXXIV.

 THE KING OF FRANCE MARRIES THE PRINCESS MARY, SISTER TO KING HENRY OF
 ENGLAND.--FRANCIS DUKE OF VALOIS AND COUNT OF ANGOULESME MARRIES THE
 PRINCESS CLAUDE, DAUGHTER TO THE KING OF FRANCE.--THE NEW QUEEN MAKES
 HER PUBLIC ENTRY INTO FRANCE.


After the funeral of the late queen of France, the king came to Paris,
and was lodged at the hôtel of the Tournelles, and would not that any
one should appear in his presence but in mourning. He sent for his
two daughters, the princesses Claude and Renée, who were conducted to
him from Blois by madame d'Angoulême, and shortly after summoned the
princes and great barons of his realm to a council on the present state
of affairs, and respecting a peace with England. In consequence of what
had been resolved on in this council, the king sent, as his ambassadors
to king Henry, the governor of Normandy, the president of Rouen, and
the lord Longueville, then a prisoner of war in England, was added to
them, to treat of a peace.

While this was passing, the king was taken very ill at the castle
of Vincennes, and had ordered, for his recovery, that 'O Salutaris
Hostia,' should be chaunted daily in all the churches of France, at the
elevation of the holy sacrament, which had been of the utmost benefit
to him. On his recovery, the king went thence to St Germain en Laye, to
recreate himself, and to temper the melancholy of his mourning; for it
was a pleasant country, interspersed with woods and dales, and full of
game.

Much public business was transacted during the king's stay at Saint
Germain; and a marriage was concluded between the duke of Valois, count
of Angoulême, and the princess Claude. They were married in their
mourning, in the chapel of the castle, in the presence of the king, the
princes of the blood, and many others of high rank, on the 18th of May,
in the year 1513.

About this period, and before the king had quitted St Germain en Laye,
his ambassadors sent him intelligence of their having concluded a peace
with England, on condition of his marrying the princess Mary. King
Henry sent ambassadors to Paris, to confirm the marriage between king
Louis and his sister, and to ratify the treaty of peace that had been
agreed on between the two kingdoms, which was now publicly proclaimed
in both realms.

On Monday the 16th of August, in this year, a grand procession was
made from the great hall of the palace, with trumpets and clarions,
when the herald, called Mont-joye, proclaimed a magnificent tournament
to be holden at Paris, by the duke of Valois, Brittany, and count of
Angoulême, to which he invited all princes, lords, and gentlemen to
assist. It was about this time that the princess Mary was escorted to
France by many of the great nobles of England, in company with the
lords of France who had gone thither to attend on her. The king left
Paris, with his court, and went as far as Abbeville to meet the new
queen, where she arrived on the 8th of October, and made her public
entry very triumphantly, attended by the duke of Valois and numbers of
nobles, as well English as French, all most richly dressed, with large
golden chains, especially the English. The queen was most handsomely
attired, and seated in a brilliant car: in short, the whole was a
beautiful sight. She was preceded by a body of two hundred english
archers, gallantly accoutred, with their bows in hand, and quivers full
of arrows.

The king, hearing of her coming, mounted his horse, and, attended
by his nobles, rode out into the plain, under pretence of hawking,
but it was to meet her; and on his approaching her, he kissed her on
horseback, paying her many fair compliments, as he knew well how to do.
Her reception in Abbeville was most honourable,--and the inhabitants
exerted themselves who should surpass the other in testifying their
joy at her arrival.

On the morrow, the feast of St Denis, the king of France was married
to the princess Mary of England. She was most magnificently dressed,
with an immense quantity of diamonds and precious stones. A singular
banquet succeeded, with a great variety of all sorts of amusements.
Having staid a few days in Abbeville to solace themselves, they set out
for Paris; and through the towns of Picardy they passed, the greatest
honours were paid them. In every town, the queen gave liberty to the
prisoners, by the king's command. On their arrival at St Denis, the
ceremony of the queen's coronation took place, which was very splendid,
and numerously attended by archbishops, bishops, and nobility.

Monday, the 6th of November, the queen made her triumphant entry into
the city of Paris--the clergy, courts of parliament, of exchequer, &c.
and all the municipal officers, with crowds of people, having gone out
in procession to meet her. She was seated on a rich litter, adorned
with precious stones, and escorted by the duke of Valois, the lord of
Alençon, the lord of Bourbon, the lord of Vendôme, his brother the lord
Francis, Louis de Nevers, with other great lords, as well of England
as of France, prelates and churchmen. Her litter was followed by those
of the princess Claude, duchess of Valois, madame d'Angoulême, madame
de Vendôme, madame de Nevers, and other princesses of both kingdoms.
Thus was she conducted to the church of Nôtre Dame, and took the usual
oaths: she thence proceeded to the royal palace, where a most splendid
banquet was provided. The king and queen lay that night at the royal
palace, which served to shorten his days.




CHAP. XXXV.

 OF THE TILTS PERFORMED AT PARIS.--THE DEATH AND INTERMENT OF LOUIS
 XII. KING OF FRANCE.


The next day, the king and queen went to the Tournelles, to see the
tournaments, that had been before proclaimed. At the entrance of the
lists was a triumphal arch surmounted with the shields of arms of the
king and queen: below them were the emblazoned shields of the lords and
princes, the tenants and defendants of the lists. The duke of Valois
was the chief tenant, with his assistants,--and many gallant courses
were ran with lances, to the advantage of some, and to the loss of
others. In short, it was a handsome spectacle, and all in compliment
to, and for the love of, queen Mary; but her popularity would not have
lasted long, for although the poor people were already heavily taxed,
yet the king intended, had he lived longer, to have greatly increased
the taxes.

After these justs and tourneys, the king carried the queen to St
Germain en Laye, where they spent some time, leading as joyous a life
as he was able. He thence returned to his palace of the Tournelles
at Paris, and was taken so dangerously ill that he made preparations
becoming a good Christian, and rendered his soul to God on the 1st
day of January, in the year 1514. His body was aromatically embalmed,
and lay in state some days at the Tournelles, where every body went
to see it who pleased. The usual ceremonies on such occasions were
then performed, but it would be tiresome to detail them. Some days
after, the body was carried to the church of Nôtre Dame, and placed in
a chapel that had been purposely erected in the choir,--and a solemn
service was performed by the bishop of Paris. The next day it was borne
to a cross near to St Denis, where the abbot and his monks of St Denis
met it, and was, by them, interred with great pomp, amidst the tears
of his officers and domestics. He was buried beside his queen, Anne of
Brittany. May God receive their souls! The principal mourners were the
lord of Alençon, the lord of Bourbon, the lord of Vendôme, and other
princes and great lords.

It is of some moment when a king or great prince dies, who may,
perhaps, have caused the deaths of numbers of human creatures like
themselves; for I believe that in the other world they will have enough
to do, more especially respecting this circumstance, that a poor
man, with six or seven small children, not worth twenty sols in the
world, shall be taxed from ten to twenty sols, and when the collector
shall come to receive the tax, finding the man worth nothing, and
without means of raising the money, he commits him to prison, where he
languishes out his days. Now I would like to have shown any written law
for this injustice; but no one will attempt so to do, because every one
is eager to push himself forward in this world. May God assist the poor
people!




CHAP. XXXVI.

 FRANCIS I. KING OF FRANCE, IS CONSECRATED AT RHEIMS.--HE MAKES HIS
 PUBLIC ENTRY INTO PARIS.--HE LEAVES FRANCE TO ATTACK THE SWISS, IN THE
 MILANESE, WHO HAVE TAKEN POSSESSION OF THAT DUCHY.


After the death of Louis XII. Francis, the first of the name, succeeded
him on the throne as the fifty-seventh king of France. He set out from
Paris, to be consecrated king in the cathedral of Rheims, according to
the custom of his ancestors kings of France, and was there anointed
with the holy oil on the 25th day of January, in the year 1514. The
twelve peers of France, or their substitutes, were present exercising
their functions in the usual manner on such occasions.

Madame d'Angoulême, the king's mother, was present at the ceremony,
accompanied by madame de Bourbon, madame de Vendôme, and other ladies
and damsels. The king went from Rheims to be crowned at St Denis,
and, on his return, made triumphal public entries into Laon, Noyon,
Compiègne, Senlis, and other towns. He continued his way toward Paris,
very grandly attended, and made the most brilliant public entry into
that city that had ever been seen. The accoutrements and trappings
of the horses were of wrought silver, with frized cloth of gold;
and, to sum up the whole in few words, the lords and gentlemen, with
their horses, were covered with cloth of gold: some had their dresses
interwrought with solid silver.

The king entered in triumph, dressed magnificently: the trappings of
his horse were of worked silver, and his attendants equipped in cloth
of silver brocade. He went, as usual, to the royal palace, where a
sumptuous banquet had been prepared, with a numerous band of trumpets
and clarions; after which, a grand tournament was held in the rue St
Antoine, when the king acquitted himself most gallantly.

A treaty was concluded between the king of France and the archduke,
and a marriage agreed on between the archduke and the princess Renée,
daughter to the late king, Louis XII. by the count of Nassau, and
other ambassadors dispatched for this purpose. The count of Nassau
was also betrothed to the daughter of the prince of Orange, whom
he afterwards married. At this time, the duke of Bourbon was made
constable of France,--and while the king remained at Paris, the duke of
Suffolk espoused the queen-dowager of France, sister to Henry king of
England. That king had sent the duke of Suffolk to France,--and when he
carried his queen to England, he was grandly accompanied by the highest
of the nobility. Thus was confirmed the peace between the two kingdoms.
At this time also, the king of France sent to seek Pedro de Navarre, a
prisoner of war, whom he set at liberty, gave him many rich gifts, and
the command of a large body of men.

When all these marriages, and other matters, had been concluded, the
king celebrated the feast of Easter in Paris, and then, with his queen
and court, went by water as far as Montereau-faut-Yonne. He thence
went, on the 1st of May, to a small castle called Egreville, where
were some justings, and proceeded to Montargis and Briare, where he
embarked on the Loire for Amboise. He made a public entry into all the
towns he passed,--namely, Mehun, Montereau, Montargis, Blois, Amboise,
and other small towns, where every honour was paid him.

While he was hunting at Amboise, a thorn pierced his leg, through
boot and hose, and gave him such pain that he was for a time very
ill.--During his residence at Amboise, the lord de Lorraine was married
to mademoiselle de Bourbon, sister to the constable of France. Great
feasts were displayed on the occasion, and the court of the donjon of
the castle was covered with an awning of cloth, to keep off the rays of
the sun. In the evening of that day were great maskings and mummeries,
with morris-dancers richly dressed, and divers pastimes.

These feastings being over, the king departed, very early one morning,
for Romorantin[55], where he was also grandly entertained by the lady,
his mother. While with her, he received intelligence that the Swiss
had entered Dauphiny, near to Briançon, and burnt a village close to
Château Dauphin; on which, he took a hasty leave of his mother, and
set off suddenly for Bourges, where he made a public entry. The king
departed, on the morrow, in haste, for Moulins, where the duchess
of Bourbon handsomely received him,--and his entry was splendid for
so small a town; for there were triumphant cars, filled with the
handsomest ladies of the country, representations of ships and wild
beasts, mounted by the beauties of the town, who preceded the king on
his entry. The king left Moulins for Lyon, where a most magnificent
entry was prepared for him. He gave there his final orders respecting
the provision and stores, which were in a state of forwardness to
be transported over the Alps, for the prosecution of the war in the
Milanese. During his absence in Italy, he nominated his mother, the
duchess of Anjou and Maine, countess of Angoulême, &c. regent of the
kingdom.

Shortly after, the king departed from Lyon, and went to Grenoble, where
he made a handsome entry, and staid there until his preparations should
be completed. About this period, the young son of Frederic late king
of Naples died: he had already commenced a warlike career; and had he
lived I believe he would have made a figure as a warrior, for he was
very courageous and virtuous.

When the king set out from Grenoble, he passed through Embrun, although
his army, or the greater part, had taken the road through the small
town of Duissant, for there had been formed stores of provision on all
that line of march. The king halted at Guillestre[56], and afterward at
Saint Paul[57], and then traversed a road so bad that it was thought
no man had ever before attempted it. Great difficulties attended this
march, and the poor infantry suffered much; for as the artillery was to
pass this road, the cannon were dismounted, and dragged by men over the
rocks.

During this time, the pope had sent fifteen hundred horse, well
appointed, under the command of Prospero Colonna, to join the forces
of Maximilian, in the hope of surprising the king before he could pass
the mountains; but Prospero, ignorant how near he was to the French,
or that they had succeeded in passing the Alps, had halted at a town
in Piedmont called Villa-franca[58]. Of this circumstance, a peasant
of that country had informed one of the king's gentlemen, named the
lord de la Morette, and that, as Prospero was quite unsuspicious of
the French being so near, it would be easy to surprise him. The lord
de la Morette lost no time to carry this news to the marshal de la
Palisse, the lord d'Aubigny, the lord d'Imbercourt, Bayard and others,
who all instantly agreed to follow the lord d'Imbercourt in the
attempt to surprise Colonna. He had sent forward one of his archers
to reconnoitre, who reported, that as Colonna and his men were just
sitting down to dinner, and entirely off their guard, an immediate
attack would be necessary: d'Imbercourt sent, therefore, to hasten the
march of La Palisse and the others.

Notwithstanding this, d'Imbercourt boldly advanced to enter Villa
Franca,--when as his trumpet was within the gates, and had sounded his
charge, his horse's neck was inclosed within them; but the men at arms
came to his relief, by crossing their lances over the horse, and put to
death all who had opposed them at the gate.

They galloped up the streets, shouting out 'France, France!' and
advanced to where Colonna was at dinner: a sharp conflict now took
place,--but the lord de la Palisse and the others arrived, who soon
ended it, by making Colonna prisoner, and slaying great numbers of his
men. All his baggage was pillaged, and very many fine horses gained
that were in the stables of the town. Prospero Colonna was carried,
with the other prisoners, to the king of France, and thence sent into
confinement at the castle of Montagu, belonging to the lord de la
Palisse.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 55: Romorantin,--15 leagues from Amboise, 11 from Blois.]

[Footnote 56: Guillestre,--near Mont-Dauphin, in Dauphiny.]

[Footnote 57: St Paul,--a village in Dauphiny.]

[Footnote 58: Villa-franca,--16 miles SSW. of Turin.]




CHAP. XXXVII.

 THE KING OF FRANCE PURSUES THE SWISS WITH HIS WHOLE ARMY.--THE TOWN
 AND CASTLE OF NOVARA SURRENDER TO THE KING.


The pope, when he heard of the defeat of Prospero Colonna and his army,
and that he was sent prisoner to France, was very much surprised, and
not without reason; for he never had imagined that the king of France
would attempt to cross the Alps where he had, and for some time would
not believe it.

The Swiss cantoned at Susa, Villaine, Rivoli and other parts, hearing
of what had passed at Villa-franca, retreated toward Milan followed by
the French as far as Turin, whence the duke of Savoy came out to meet
the king, and gave him a handsome reception. The king, having received
from the duke of Savoy five large pieces of artillery, continued
his pursuit of the Swiss who had passed the Po in an extraordinary
hurry,--for they had no boats, nor any means but cords to drag their
artillery and baggage over, with which they marched day and night.

They burnt the castle of Chivazzo, and part of that small town,
belonging to the duke of Savoy, which lay on their line of march,
killing many of the inhabitants and plundering the town, because they
would not afford them provision, nor allow them a passage through
Chivazzo. Some of the Swiss were slain, that had remained behind to
pillage.

In this interval, the lord de Prie, with a body of Genoese, arrived at
Alexandria and other towns, which he sacked, although their inhabitants
had fled,--but they were deserving of punishment for the many tricks
they had before played the French.

The french army kept pursuing the Swiss, who seemed inclined to march
to Jurea[59], but, turning short, entered Novara. The king arrived with
his army at Vercelli[60], where it was rumoured that an agreement
would take place between the king and Swiss. The lord bastard of
Savoy and the lord de Lautrec, with others, were charged with this
commission; but notwithstanding this, the king continued his march
after the Swiss, who had quitted Novara, and taken the road to Milan.
He was now joined by a considerable reinforcement of Lansquenets,
called The Black Band[61], very well equipped. The king advanced to
Novara, which was instantly assaulted by Pedro de Navarre and others,
and surrendered to the king's obedience.

In the absence of the king, his queen was brought to bed, at Amboise,
of a fair daughter, who was christened Louisa,--and soon afterwards,
her portrait was sent to him, while engaged in his Italian campaign.

The surrender of the town and castle of Novara saved them from pillage,
by the king's commands,--who pursuing his march toward Milan, went
to Bufalora. Here the agreement between the king and Swiss was made
public, which had been accomplished by means of a large sum of money
paid down, according to a promise made them by the king. The Swiss, in
consequence, swore fidelity to him, and signed the treaty,--but which
they did not keep, notwithstanding their oaths and engagements, but
falsified both.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 59: Jurea,--on the great Dora in Piedmont.]

[Footnote 60: Vercelli,--30 miles SW. of Milan, 38 NE. of Turin.]

[Footnote 61: Black band,--under the command of Ruberta della Marchia,
from lower Germany.

Guicciardini.

I must refer the reader to Guicciardini, &c. for further details of
these wars in Italy.]




CHAP. XXXVIII.

 THE KING OF FRANCE DEFEATS THE SWISS ARMY AT MARIGNANO[62], ON THE
 FEAST-DAY OF THE EXALTATION OF THE CROSS.--OF THE CRUEL BATTLE AND
 SLAUGHTER OF THE FRENCH AND SWISS.


The king of France, thinking that he had secured the Swiss by the
payment of the sum agreed on between them and the lord de Lautrec,
marched his army to Marignano, beyond Milan; but it was not long
before he found that he had miscalculated on their keeping the promises
they had made him. In the interval between the signing of the late
treaty and the payment of the money, the Swiss had resolved to surprise
the king's army,--induced thereto by the remonstrances and preachments
of the cardinal of Sion, who had corrupted them at the instigation of
the emperor Maximilian, and of the inhabitants of the Milanese, who
had given them corslets and other armour, together with the fairest
promises. The Swiss believing that they would be joined by every
Italian, and that, if successful, they might acquire territories of a
great extent in a fertile country, and be feared and redoubted by all
the world, caused them to act in the treacherous manner they did.

The king learning that the Swiss were turned against him, was much
mortified; for he concluded, that at that moment they were receiving
the money agreed on. However, like a hardy knight, he was not cast
down, but gave his orders for the forming of his army, to receive the
enemy with the most advantage. While thus employed, news was brought
him that a large body of infantry, well armed had marched out of Milan,
to join the Swiss in the meditated attack against him. In fact, about
three or four o'clock in that afternoon, the Swiss advanced on the
king's army, but were received with such valour that many were more
inclined to seek for a retreat than to persevere in the combat.

The king, who commanded the main body, on seeing the Swiss advance,
charged them in person, attended by his gentlemen, and defeated one
band. The french volunteers now placed themselves in the position of
the Lansquenets, who had in part turned their backs; but they must not
be blamed for this, for they had before heard of the agreement made
with the Swiss, and, without any explanation, had been led on to an
unexpected battle, which made them believe that they were betrayed by
the king, who wanted to have them destroyed. But when they saw the
volunteers thus step boldly into their ranks, they recovered courage,
and fought with the utmost bravery.

The french volunteers did wonders; and although they were not numerous,
amounting to no more than two thousand, they defeated a band of Swiss
consisting of double their number. Great feats of arms were done at
this battle, with battle-axes, lances, and two-handed-swords, so that
for a long time it was doubtful on which side victory would remain.

The Swiss behaved with the utmost courage, and charged the main body
and reserve of the French with an impetuosity that astonished them,
in the hopes of succeeding as they had before done at Novara. The
artillery of the French was not asleep, and the Swiss made an attempt
to seize it, but were repulsed with much loss,--for not a cannon was
fired without killing numbers of them.

This battle lasted until the going down of the sun,--and both sides
fought as long as the dust and light allowed them to see each other.
Some, thinking to retire to their own camp, found themselves in that
of the enemy; but what caused great confusion was the Swiss shouting
out 'France, France!' and then attacking the French. The night was not
long. The king was constantly with his men, giving them every sort of
encouragement, by words and example. He was particularly anxious about
his artillery, which was well guarded by a party of Lansquenets. Having
visited the different divisions of his army, he reposed himself in his
armour, on the carriage of a cannon; and I may with truth assert, that
if the king had not been present at this engagement the French would
have had more than enough to do.

On the morrow, the 14th of September, in the year 1515, and the feast
of the Exaltation of the Cross, the Swiss, enraged against the French,
advanced on them by day-break (notwithstanding their loss on the
preceding night had been more than they supposed) with an eagerness
as if they had been going to a dance, and made their charge with
valour and steadiness. The conflict was long and doubtful; but the
king's artillery, where he was in person, did the greatest service,
particularly on a strong body that kept firmly united until their
losses were so considerable, the remainder turned their backs, and
fled for Milan. The other divisions of the Swiss made now little
resistance; and to make short of the matter, all that remained were put
to death, or taken prisoners; and had not the dust been great, fewer
would have escaped,--for it was so thick they could not see many yards
before them[63].

The heat that day was very oppressive; and the king and his lords
suffered greatly from thirst, for there was no water near that was
pure,--for all the springs and streams were discoloured with blood, of
which, nevertheless, they were forced to drink; at length, some clear
water was brought them.

The king was as much rejoiced that the Swiss had renewed the battle, on
the following day, as a huntsman when he lays blinkes in the chace of a
stag. The Swiss left full sixteen thousand dead on the field, who did
not lose their lives like children, but as men of true courage; and all
the roads toward Milan and Como were full of those who in their flight
had died of the wounds they had received in battle.

This was the first victory of king Francis I. and was very marvellous
it proved so great, considering how much he had been deceived in the
Swiss by their treaty some days prior to the combat. It is worthy of
remembrance,--for since the days of Julius Cæsar, this nation, so
valorous in war, never lost in battle so many as sixteen thousand men.
Louis XI. had defeated, when dauphin, a body of three or four thousand:
a duke of Milan had also conquered a body of two thousand, which
inclines me so much to exalt this victory of the king over enemies so
determined and numerous, for thirty-six thousand men had marched out of
Milan.

Toward the end of the combat, a reinforcement of Venetians arrived,
which the constable of Bourbon had gone to seek. The troops made all
diligence, were well accoutred and ready for battle; but they found the
Swiss defeated, and flying in all directions, for Como and Milan.

The Venetians pursued the enemy, and showed themselves men of courage,
particularly their commander, sir Bartholomew d'Alviano and the son
of the count de Petigliano, who did wonders; but as he was attempting
to leap a wide ditch, his horse fell upon him,--and he was surrounded
and slain by the Swiss, for none were near enough to prevent them. The
lord d'Imbercourt was also killed fighting valiantly; he had rushed
among the ranks of the Swiss, like to an enraged wild boar, and was
of a most warlike nature, with the intrepidity of a lion, as many can
testify, who have seen him engaged on former occasions. Francis lord of
Bourbon was inclosed by the Swiss and put to death, his men not being
nigh to rescue him. The prince of Tallemont, the count de Sancerre, the
lord de Bussi, the captain Mouy, with a very great number of lords and
gentlemen of renown, whose courage had many times been displayed in
war, were killed at this battle.

During the engagement, neither baggage nor artillery were in danger
of being taken, for they were excellently well defended by those who
ran as much risk as others engaged in the main battle. Many were well
mounted, so that, if fortune had been adverse, the poor adventurers
might have been able to support their friends, and have renewed the
fight.

The king made, this day, several new knights. During the conflict,
the cardinal of Sion fled, on seeing the quantities of dead,
under pretence, as he told Maximilian Sforza, of bringing back
reinforcements, but returned when too late.

In the course of this great butchery, a body of Swiss retreated toward
a cassino of the van-guard, where was posted the duke of Bourbon,
constable of France: he instantly pursued them, had the cassino set
on fire, and unless they could have flown through the flames, not one
could have escaped. May God have mercy on their souls, and of all those
who fell on this day! It is a great pity that it should be in the power
of two or three persons to cause the deaths of so many human creatures,
whom they seem to estimate no more than as so many sheep. Alas! they
are not beasts, and have sense and reason, or at least ought to have,
although sometimes their strength fails through wicked intentions.

Some of the wounded Swiss fled to Milan, others to Como: those who
entered Milan told the citizens that they had gained the battle, on
which they were led to the great hospital to be cured,--but when the
Lansquenets afterwards entered that city, they finished to cure them in
a strange and terrible manner.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 62: Marignano,--eleven miles SE. from Milan.]

[Footnote 63: The marshal de Trivulce said that he had been at eighteen
pitched battles, but that they were children's play compared with this.]




CHAP. XXXIX.

 MILAN SURRENDERS TO THE KING OF FRANCE.--THE CASTLE, BESIEGED BY THE
 FRENCH, SURRENDERS ON CAPITULATION.


Not long after this victory, the townsmen of Milan waited on the king,
to beg his mercy and pardon for what they had done, and to present
him with the keys of their gates. The king mercifully received them,
and forgave them, but not without making them pay a heavy fine. The
french army now marched to lay siege to the castle of Milan, into which
Maximilian Sforza with a body of Swiss, and others whom he collected,
had thrown themselves. The artillery made, within a few days, several
breaches in the outworks; and Pedro de Navarre had worked his mines
under the walls of the castle with such success great part of them fell
down.

Maximilian, perceiving himself in danger, made offers to capitulate,
when the king sent his chancellor with other gentlemen to treat with
him. They were all handsomely dressed: the chancellor had on a flowing
robe of raised cloth of gold. Having entered the castle, they instantly
began a negotiation with Maximilian for peace, and proceeded in it so
far that he accompanied them to the king's camp, where the treaty was
concluded, on condition that the Swiss in the castle should be allowed
to march away with their baggage in safety, and be paid the whole of
the money that had been promised them by the king of France.

Maximilian, by this treaty, resigned all pretensions to the duchy of
Milan[64] to the king, who received him with kindness, and had him
escorted to France, where he was henceforth to reside. The king made a
brilliant entry into Milan, and staid there some time, during which he
was magnificently feasted by the nobles and gentlemen of the town and
duchy.

In regard to the inhabitants of Pavia, they escaped being pillaged from
their poverty, for all of the richer sort had retired into Milan so
soon as they heard of the king's successes,--and a treaty was concluded
with them by means of a sum of money.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 64: This was brought about by the constable of Bourbon, who
bargained that Maximilian should enjoy a yearly pension of 30,000
ducats, &c.

See the french and italian historians, and particularly Mr. Roscoe's
Lorenzo de Medici and Leo X.]




CHAP. XL.

 POPE LEO X. AND THE KING OF FRANCE MEET AT BOLOGNA, TO CONFER ON THE
 STATE OF AFFAIRS.--THE KING RETURNS TO FRANCE.


About this period died the commander of the venetian forces, the
lord Bartholomew d'Alviano. His death was caused by a fever, from
overheating himself. He was much regretted for his valour and his
attachment to the french interest. The Lansquenets received from the
king, at two different times, double pay. And during his residence at
Milan, a treaty was concluded by him with the Swiss-cantons, by means
of a large sum of money paid them, notwithstanding they had been so
lately conquered by the French.

When this treaty was signed, ambassadors were sent from the pope to
the king, to invite him to Bologna, that they might hold a conference
on the state of the affairs of Italy, and for the mutual strengthening
of their friendship and alliance. The king, in consequence, left
Milan with a numerous attendance, especially of men at arms, and
arrived at Bologna, where he had a welcome reception from the pope,
who entertained him handsomely,--and they had frequent and long
conversations together.

One day, the pope performed a solemn service in the cathedral, at which
the king assisted. It lasted some time; after which, an alliance was
concluded between them. The pope gave up to the king several towns
that belonged to him in right of the duchy of Milan. He gave also a
cardinal's hat to the bishop of Constance, brother to the grand master
of France.

When every thing had been concluded between the pope and the king, he
returned to Milan, and thence took the road to France, leaving the
duke of Bourbon, constable of France, his lieutenant-general of the
Milanese[65]. He made all diligence in crossing the Alps, and arrived
at La Baûme, where the queen and his lady-mother were waiting for
him. He was joyfully received there, as well as in many other towns in
Provence. On leaving La Baûme, they all came together to Avignon, and
had a handsome entry. Thence they proceeded to Lyon, where the queen
made her public entry, and was received with all demonstrations of joy.

At this time died Ferdinand king of Arragon, who, during his reign,
had made many conquests, more especially over the Moors, whom he had
subjected to his obedience. At this period, also, died the magnificent
Lorenzo de Medici, brother to pope Leo X., who had lately married
a sister to the duke of Savoy, and sister also to the countess of
Angoulême, mother to Francis I. king of France. He had been appointed
generalissimo of the army of the church.

Nearly at this period, a furious battle was fought between the Sophi,
called Ishmael, and the grand Turk, and won by the latter, when more
than one hundred and sixty thousand men were slain[66]. The Sophi,
however, undismayed, collected fresh troops, and marched a considerable
army against the Turk, whom he, in his turn, defeated, and drove him
beyond the walls of Constantinople into Greece. The Sophi remained
in possession of all the conquered country, while the Turk was like
a captive within the territories of Christendom, and the war was
continued on both sides.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 65: Is not this a mistake? was not Lautrec governor of the
Milanese? and who offended the inhabitants by his severity.]

[Footnote 66: In the 'Art de Verifier les Dates,' I find that Selim I.
emperor of the Ottomans, marches in the year 1514 against Ishmael king
of Persia, defeats him in the plain of Chaldéron, and gains Tauris. War
was continued between them until the year 1516, when Selim turned his
arms against Kansou sultan of Egypt.]




CHAP. XLI.

 THE EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN ASSEMBLES A LARGE ARMY, TO ATTEMPT THE CONQUEST
 OF THE MILANESE, AND TO DRIVE THE FRENCH OUT OF ITALY.--THE CONSTABLE
 OF BOURBON, LIEUTENANT-GENERAL FOR THE KING IN ITALY, MARCHES AGAINST
 HIM.


While the king of France was at Lyon, and toward the end of Lent,
in the year 1516, another war broke out in Italy, through the usual
manœuvres of the emperor Maximilian: he, at this time, was excited by
the angels of king Henry of England, which had not for a long time
flown in his country,--and by their means he subsidised the cantons of
Swisserland and the Grisons. He also urged the citizens of Milan to
revolt, principally through Galeas Visconti; and thinking every thing
in a good train, he marched toward Milan with a body of troops that he
had collected, under the brother of Maximilian Sforza, now resident in
France according to the treaty that had been concluded with him after
the battle of Marignano.

The emperor having, as I have said, assembled an army, marched it from
the plains of Verona to Lodi; but the constable, whom the king had
left, as his lieutenant, in the Milanese, hearing of this, collected
as many men together as the shortness of the time would allow, and
advanced to meet the enemy. His numbers were not great, on account
of this expedition of the emperor being unexpected, although he had
received hints of his intention, some seven weeks before, but he was
not certain of the truth.

The constable marched his army to the river Adda, and found the enemy
posted on the opposite bank. A short time prior to this, the king of
France had summoned some of the nobles of Milan to come to him, who
proceeded as far as Suza, to the number of thirty-seven, when they
held a consultation; and on the morrow, thirty-three of them fled to
join the emperor,--but the other four remained loyal to the French,
continued the road to Lyon, and related to the king the shameful
conduct of the others.

To return to our subject; the duke of Bourbon, when on the Adda,
dispatched messengers to the Swiss-cantons, to hasten the troops the
king had agreed for,--and in consequence, about nine or ten thousand
infantry for the preservation of Milan, marched to Jurea. The duke
of Bourbon was preparing to attack the imperialists, when he heard
that Milan was on the point of a revolt; and as he had not sufficient
force to meet the army of the emperor with advantage, he was advised
to retreat to Milan, although he was himself most desirous to try the
event of a combat, and wait the coming of the Swiss, who remained very
long at Jurea.

The duke retreated with his army back to Milan with all diligence,
to the great surprise of the inhabitants: he immediately had strict
inquiries made after the authors of the intended revolt: several were
confined in prison, and many were beheaded. The other citizens, seeing
that the French were completely masters of their town, and that they
were not the strongest, determined to suffer all extremities should
the French continue their ill treatment.

The emperor, when he heard of this sudden retreat of the French,
thought he had already conquered them, and, crossing the Adda, marched
his army toward Milan, and fixed his quarters near to Marignano.
You may easily imagine how much the burghers of Milan were now
alarmed,--for the constable had one of the suburbs burnt, to prevent
the enemy from fortifying it.

A few days after, the duke of Bourbon sent presents of cloths of gold,
and of silk, to the principal leaders of the Swiss, to hasten their
march, which had the desired effect,--and they soon appeared before the
castle, wherein they were joyfully received by the constable. He had
immediately Milan strengthened with ditches and outworks, so that it
was much stronger than ever. The emperor advanced with his army, now
very numerous, before the walls, and saluted them with a large train
of artillery, which was as boldly returned from the ramparts by the
garrison.




CHAP. XLII.

 THE EMPEROR MAXIMILIAN, FINDING THAT HE COULD NOT SUCCEED IN HIS
 ATTEMPT ON MILAN, MARCHES AWAY.


The emperor was much surprised that his army should be in the utmost
distress for provision, as he expected that Milan would have opened
its gates on his appearing before them, according to the promises he
had received from Galeas Visconti: but just the contrary happened;
and as he had heard of the reinforcements the French had obtained,
and felt how much his own army suffered from want of provision, and
also that he had now no great quantity of english angels, he retreated
toward Bergamo, and summoned that town to surrender. The inhabitants,
perceiving that no succours could be expected from Milan, raised a
sum of money among themselves, and offered it to the emperor, on his
marching away. He thence retreated toward Lodi, plundered and burnt
great part of the town, and put to death many of the inhabitants,
which was a great pity.

The duke of Bourbon followed close on the rear of the emperor's army,
when skirmishes frequently happened, to the loss of the imperialists
in killed and wounded. Maximilian, finding his situation become
disagreeable, went away under pretence that the death of the king of
Hungary was the cause of his sudden departure, leaving his army in a
very doubtful state, which then was broken up, and the men retreated to
their homes.

The emperor, however, pocketed fifty thousand angels the king of
England had sent to his aid, thinking that he was in the quiet
possession of the Milanese,--but he was far enough from it.

About this time, the king of France sent some of the gentlemen of his
bedchamber to assist the duke of Bourbon in managing the affairs of the
Milanese.




CHAP. XLIII.

 THE KING OF FRANCE GOES ON A PILGRIMAGE TO THE CHURCH OF THE HOLY
 HANDKERCHIEF IN CHAMBERY.--A TREATY OF PEACE CONCLUDED BETWEEN HIM AND
 THE ARCHDUKE KING OF SPAIN.


About Whitsuntide, in this year of 1516, the king of France departed
from Lyon, accompanied by many gentlemen, to fulfil a vow he had made
of a pilgrimage to the church of the Holy Handkerchief in Chambery. As
he had vowed to perform it on foot, he set out accordingly, with his
train of attendants. They formed a handsome spectacle; for they were
all splendidly dressed in fancy habiliments, decorated with plenty of
feathers. Thus they followed the king on foot as far as Chambery, where
he met the duke of Bourbon on his return from Italy. This meeting gave
much joy to both,--and the king was entertained at Chambery, during his
stay there, by the duke of Savoy.

At this time, a treaty was concluded between the Spaniards and the
garrison in the castle of Brescia, who marched away with their arms
and baggage. The Venetians, to whom the place belonged, immediately
took possession of the town and castle, conformably to an agreement
made with the late king of France, Louis XII. Somewhat prior to
this, several counts in Germany collected bodies of men, and entered
Lorraine, where they committed much mischief. The cause of this warfare
was a claim the Lansquenets made on certain mines in that country, on
the borders of Germany, which they attempted to gain; but the duke of
Lorraine repulsed them, and nothing more was done. These counts waited
afterwards on the king of France, at Tours, and were presented to him
by the lord de Florenge, son to the captain de la Marche.

On the king's return from Savoy, he went into Touraine. About this
time, the king of Navarre died: he was son to the lord d'Albret, and
had been driven out of his kingdom by Ferdinand the Catholic, as has
been before mentioned. A treaty of peace was now concluded between the
king of France and the archduke king of Spain, which was proclaimed at
Paris and throughout the realm. One of the conditions was, that the
king of Spain should marry the princess Louisa, only daughter to the
king of France.

A conference on the subject of peace was holden at Noyon. The
commissioners from the king of France were, the grand master, the
bishop of Paris, the president Olivier, and others,--and the great
lords of Flanders and of Spain, on the part of the king of Spain. The
lord de Ravenstein was afterwards sent by him, as his ambassador to the
king of France, grandly accompanied by the barons of Picardy.

On Saturday, the 6th day of October, in the before-mentioned year, the
king arrived in his good city of Paris, where he was received with the
usual demonstrations of joy. On the morrow, he departed for the abbey
of St Denis, in order to replace the saints in their shrines, which,
at his request, had been taken down for the general welfare of his
realm, and to return them his humble thanks for the great victory he
had obtained through their means and intercessions. This was the usual
custom for the kings of France to perform, in person, on their return
from foreign wars.


THE END.




NOTES AND EMENDATIONS.


Page 6. line 12. _Lord de Guise._] Claude, second son of René the
second, duke of Lorraine, was ancestor of the dukes of Guise. He died
in 1550 and therefore must have been very young at this period.

Page 6. line 5. from the bottom. _Melfy. Q. Amelfi?_] Mary, natural
daughter of king Ferdinand, married to Anthony, duke of Amelfi, of the
house of Piccolomini.

Page 16. line 15. _Lord de Luxembourg._] See note p. 108.

Page 24. line 7 from the bottom. _Marquis of Mantua._] Francis III.
fourth marquis of Mantua, of the house of Gonzaga.

Page 24. line 3 from the bottom. _Lord of Ferrara._] Hercules d'Este,
first duke of Modena.

Page 29. line 13. _Bastard of Bourbon._] Matthew lord of Roche, eldest
of the bastards of John II. duke of Bourbon.

Page 31. line 4 from the bottom. _Prince._] His surviving children
were 1. Charles first duke of Vendôme, the father (by Frances de
Longueville duchess of Beaumont) of Anthony king of Navarre. 2. Louis,
cardinal of Vendôme. 3. Anthonia, wife of Claude duke of Guise. 4.
Louisa abbess of Fontevraud. 5. Francis, lord of St Pol, a title which
he inherited from his mother the eldest daughter of Peter, son of the
constable. See vol. xi. page 213. note.

Page 35. line 4 from the bottom. _Died._] Prince John, to whom the
unfortunate Margaret of Austria was betrothed after her rejection by
Charles the eighth.

Page 35. line 3 from the bottom. _Duke of Savoy._] Charles John
Amadeus, commonly called Charles the second, duke of Savoy, died this
year at the tender age of eight years. The suspicion of poisoning the
waters, which is no where that I can find alluded to by Guicciardini,
probably refers to his successor Philip count of Bresse who died the
year following just at the time that he had intended to leave the party
of the king of France and embrace that of the confederates. Philip had
three sons; Philibert II. who succeeded him and died in 1504 without
issue by Margaret of Austria his wife; Charles III; and Philip duke
of Nemours. Louisa, who married Charles count of Angoulême, and is so
celebrated in history as the mother of Francis the first, was one of
his daughters.

Page 38. line 10. _Lord of Montpensier._] This prince, by his wife
Clara Gonzaga, left issue, 1. Louis count of Montpensier who died in
1501, 2. Charles, who married Susanna daughter and heiress of Peter II.
duke of Bourbon, was made constable of France in 1515, was afterwards
condemned for treason, and was killed in the imperial service at the
siege of Rome in 1527, 3. Francis duke of Chatelherault, died 1515;
4. Louisa, lady of Chavigny, 5. Reparata, married to Anthony duke of
Lorraine. Neither of the sons left any issue surviving.

Page 39. line 7. _Soul._] See Philip de Comines, whose most valuable
memoirs conclude with this event.

Page 39. line 8. from the bottom. _Lord John Peraule._] Raymond
Perault, bishop of Saintes, Cardinal in 1493, died in 1505.

Page 46. line 4 from the bottom. _Count Gayache._] Qu. Count of
Cajazzo? He was of the family of the San Severini, and connected by
marriage with the house of Sforza, but not, that I can find, with that
of Visconti.

Page 87. line 9. _Lord Peter of Bourbon._] Peter II. duke of
Bourbon, the last of the eldest line of Robert de Clermont son of
St. Louis. His only daughter and heir, Susanna, married Charles de
Bourbon-Montpensier, afterwards constable of France and duke of Bourbon.

Page 97. line 3. from the bottom. _Wife._] Eleanor, countess of Ligny
princess of Altamura, duchess of Venosa, &c. &c.

Page 100. line 15. _Brother._] Charles III. surnamed the good. Their
younger brother was Philip, who married Charlotte, daughter of Louis,
duke of Longueville, and was created duke of Nemours.

Page 100. line 17. _Duchess of Berry._] Jane daughter of Louis XI. the
repudiated wife of Louis XII. who after her divorce was called duchess
of Berry.

Page 103. line 4. _Lord of Foix._] Germaine de Foix, daughter of John
viscount de Narbonne. See note to vol. x. p. 187.

Page 105. line 12. 1506.] Leaving issue, by Joanna daughter of
Ferdinand and Isabella, 1. Charles, afterwards emperor, and king of
Spain, 2. Eleanor, the wife, first, of Emanuel king of Portugal, 2ndly
of Francis the first, 3. Isabella, the wife of Christian the second
king of Denmark; 4. Ferdinand, King of Hungary, and emperor of Germany
after the death of his brother; 5. Mary, the wife of Lewis the second
king of Hungary; 6. Catherine, the wife of John the third king of
Portugal.

Page 105. line 14. _August._] Anne the wife of Uladislaus king of
Bohemia, who succeeded to the crown of Hungary on the death of
Matthias Corvinus in 1490. By this marriage she had Lewis, afterwards
king of Hungary, and Anne the wife of Ferdinand of Austria, in whose
right he became king of Hungary on the death of Lewis in 1526 without
issue.

Page 106. line 13. _John de Bentivoglio._] John the second of the
name, son of Hannibal, and grandson of John, who made himself master
of Bologna in 1400. See the historians of Bologna, especially the
"historie memorabili" of Gasparo Bombaci who is by far the most
interesting of these writers.

Page 108. line 13. _Trivulces._]

 ----"_La nudrita Damigella Trivulzia
   al sacro speco_".

She was the daughter of Giovanni Trivulzio and Angela di Martinengo,
and is celebrated equally by the historians and poets of the age.

Page 120. line 11 from the bottom. _King._] She was married to Hercules
the second, duke of Ferrara, and died in 1575.

Page 132. line 4. _Pedro de Navarre._] Pedro Navarro, a great commander
in the Spanish army.

Page 132. line 5. _Marquis of Pescara._] Ferdinand d'Avalos, Marquis of
Pescara.

Page 132. line 8. _Betonde._] Betonde--Bitonto.

Page 132. line 12. _Viceroy of Naples._] Don Raymond de Cardona.

Page 132. line 15. _Marquis de la Padulla._] Della Palude. See
Guicciardini Lib. 10. for an account of this great battle.

Page 132. last line. _Utrecht._] More probably Trajetto, Vespasian the
son of Prospero Colonna was called duke of Trajetto, and though I do
not find his name among those present at the battle of Ravenna, it is
not unlikely that he was there under his relation Fabricio Colonna,
duke of Palliano who commanded the Italian forces.

Page 151. line 3 from the bottom. _Duke of Valois._] Francis count
d'Angoulesme the presumptive heir to the crown of France, had lately
been honoured with this title.

Page 164. line 5 from the bottom. _Brittany._] Francis was duke of
Brittany in right of the princess Claude who succeeded to that duchy
on the death of her mother queen Anne. For, although the two crowns,
the royal and ducal, had been united in the person of Louis XII, yet
the duchy remained distinct from the kingdom, and would have passed
away from it again had the princess Claude not married the heir of the
crown of France. The countries were not incorporated till the reign of
Francis I. who procured an act of union and settlement to be passed.

Page 167. line 2. _Lord of Alençon._] Charles the second duke of
Alençon, son of René and grandson of John II. who was beheaded. He
married Margaret the sister of Francis the first, afterwards wife of
Henry d'Albret king of Navarre.

Page 167. line 3. _Lord of Bourbon._] Charles duke of Bourbon mentioned
before.

Page 167. line 3. _Lord of Vendôme._] Charles duke of Vendôme and
Francis lord of St Pol, both mentioned before.

Page 167. line 4. _Louis de Nevers._] Count of Auxerre, 2d son of
Engilbert of Cleves count of Nevers who died in 1506.

Page 167. line 10. _Madame de Nevers._] Mary d'Albret, the wife of
Charles Count of Nevers eldest son of Engilbert of Cleves.




INDEX.


  Abbeville, a woman of, is burnt for killing and salting her
  children, viii. 111

  Abbey of St Vincent, near Leon, is demolished, vii. 159

  Absalon rebels through covetousness, i. 248

  Acquitaine, Louis, duke of, marries Margaret, eldest daughter to the
  duke of Burgundy, i. 121
    his marriage opposed by the duke of Orleans, i. 123

  Acquitaine, Louis, the young duke of, committed to the guardianship of
  the duke of Burgundy, ii. 150
    marches to conquer Estampes and Dourdan, ii. 349
    his secretary, and other traitors beheaded near Bourges, iii. 60
    forbids the cannoneering against Bourges, iii. 67
    the keys of Bourges delivered to him by the duke of Berry, iii. 75
    is displeased with his chancellor, iii. 133
    resolves to take upon himself the sole management of the
    kingdom, iii. 134
    threatens John, duke of Burgundy, iii. 147

  Acquitaine, duke of, is compelled to reside with the king, iii. 148
    is much troubled at the demands of the Parisians, iii. 157
    orders the prisoners to be liberated, iii. 212
    being offended with the queen, sends letters to invite the duke of
    Burgundy to march an army to Paris, iii. 285
    is pacified with the king's ministers, and writes letters to prevent
    the armament of the Burgundians, iii. 291
    his letters to the duke, iii. 300
    assembles a large force in Paris to oppose the duke of
    Burgundy, iii. 304
    denies having sent for the duke, iii. 305
    leaves Paris to join the king at Senlis, iv. 21
    is appointed to the sole management of the finances, iv. 81
    goes to Mehun-sur-Yevre, iv. 91
    goes to Paris and forbids the princes of the blood to come to that city
    until ordered by himself or the king, iv. 123
    suddenly enters the houses of the queen's confidants to search for
    money, _ib._
    takes upon himself the sole government of the kingdom, iv. 124
    is waited upon by the Parisians respecting the public safety, iv. 205
    dies of a fever at the hôtel de Bourbon, iv. 207

  Acre, the village of, is burnt by the duke of Burgundy, ix. 222

  Adolphus of Cleves, sir, tilts with several persons, ix. 291

  Agnadello, defeat of the Venetians at, xii. 113

  Agnes, the fair, is taken ill at the abbey of Jamieges, ix. 98
    her will, _ib._
    dies in great agony, ix. 99

  Aides, taxes so called, iii. 107

  Albany, the duke of, driven from Scotland by his brother, arrives
  at Paris, xi. 313

  Albastre, king of, is made prisoner by the king of Portugal, vi. 234

  Albert, duke, count of Hainault, dies, i. 120
    some account of his issue, _ib._

  Albreth, Charles d', besieges the castle of Carlefin, i. 119
    taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Alençon, lord of, his tents set on fire, iv. 60
    his gallant conduct at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 193
    slain immediately after having struck down the duke of York, _ib._

  Alençon, duke of, marries the daughter of the duke of Orleans, v. 266
    attempted to swerve from his loyalty to Charles VII. vi. 15
    makes the chancellor of Brittany prisoner, vii. 57
    conquers his town of Alençon, ix. 42
    Fresnoy surrenders to him, ix. 49
    takes Bellême castle, ix. 90
    arrested at Paris, and imprisoned, ix. 376
    the king's sentence on him, x. 3
    convicted and condemned to death for favouring the English, x. 15
    sentence commuted to perpetual imprisonment, x. 36

  Alençon, duke of, pardoned on the accession of Louis XI. xi. 51
    made prisoner by sir Tristan l'Hermite, xi. 146
    brought to Paris and detained prisoner in the Louvre, xi, 151
    tried, and condemned to be beheaded, xi. 171
    is delivered from the Louvre, xi. 222

  Alençon, the town of, surrenders to the king by the count du
  Perche, xi. 60

  Alexander V. elected pope, i. 90, 111
    unusual rejoicings at Pisa and Paris on his election, i. 90, 91
    his first bull after his election, i. 111
    is poisoned at Bologna, i. 160

  Alexander VI. Pope, succeeds Innocent VIII. xi. 381
    incites Charles VIII. to recover the kingdom of Naples, xi. 383
    his attention to the king on his entry into Rome, xi. 419

  Alexandria, the patriarch of, preaches before the council of
  Pisa, ii. 100

  Alibaudieres, fortress of, attacked by sir John of
  Luxembourg, v. 172, 175

  Alliance, letter of, between the duke of Orleans and the duke of
  Lancaster, i. 62

  Almeric, d'Orgemont, sir, seized as a conspirator, and condemned to
  perpetual imprisonment on bread and water, iv. 221

  Alphonso, king of Arragon, is defeated by the great captains
  of Italy, vi. 42
    dies, ix. 424

  Alphonso, king of Naples, on the approach of Charles VIII. embarks for
  Sicily, xii. 2
    his bastard son Fernando succeeds to the crown of Naples, ix. 424

  Alveano, Bartholomus d', a brave Venetian commander, xii. 189

  Amadeus, count of Savoy, created a duke, iv. 262

  Ambassadors sent by the king of France to negotiate a peace between
  the princes of the blood, iii. 178
    harangue of one concerning peace, iii. 183
    arrive from England to treat of a marriage between their king, and
    Catherine, daughter of the king of France, iii. 230

  Amboise, sir Charles d', regains many towns for the king in the duchy of
  Burgundy, ix. 297

  Amboise, the cardinal of, receives the submissions of the
  Milanese, xii. 54
    makes his public entry into Lyon as legate to France, xii. 76
    forms the league of Cambray, xii. 112
    falls sick at Lyon and dies, xii. 119

  Amé de Viry, his war with the duke of Bourbon, ii. 80

  Amé de Savoye, the count, ii. 195

  _Amende honorable_, what, _note_, ix. 342

  Amiennois, the, great disorders are committed by the French in, vii. 92

  Amiens, the inhabitants of, refuse to attach themselves to the
  Orleans' faction, ii. 186
    the king's proclamation to, ii. 315
    the people of, rise against the levying of some taxes which were
    intended to be laid on them, vii. 294

  Amont, the lord de, offers his services to the duke of Bedford, vii. 81

  Ampula, the holy, brought to Louis XI. when sick at Plessis
  le parc, xi. 352

  Angers, bishop of, extraordinary event at a trial between him and
  a burgher of Paris, x. 165

  Anglare, the castle of, besieged by the lord de Barbasan, vii. 13

  Angora, battle of, between Tamerlane and Bajazet, i. 107

  Angoulême, the count of, pledged to the English, iii. 93

  Angoulême, Madame d', mother of Francis I. is present at his
  coronation, xii. 175

  Anjou is invaded by the earl of Somerset, viii. 348

  Anne, duchess of Bedford, dies at Paris, vii. 100

  Anne, duchess of Brittany, married to Charles VIII. xi. 371
    is crowned and makes her public entry into Paris, xi. 378
    dies, xii. 161

  Anthony, duke of Limbourg, takes possession of that duchy and
  Maestricht, i. 180

  Anthony of Brabant marries Elizabeth, daughter of John duke of
  Luxembourg, ii. 116
    slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Anthony de Bethune, sir, is captured in his castle of Auchel, vi. 399

  Anthony de Vienne, is killed at Compiègne, vi. 391

  Anthony bastard of Burgundy, his expedition against the infidels, x. 161
    returns, x. 192
    goes to England to tilt with the lord Scales, x. 343

  Apostolical letter from Benedict XIII. to Charles king of France, i. 304

  Ardres, town of, attacked by the English from Calais, i. 131

  Argentan, is taken by the count de Dunois, ix. 26

  Argueil, the lord d', son to the prince of Orange quits the duke of
  Burgundy's service and joins the king, xi. 104

  Arkembarc, a Burgundy gentleman, takes the town of Peronne, x. 281

  Armagnac, the count, refuses to sign the treaty of peace between
  the princes of the blood, v. 3
    is taken prisoner at Paris, v. 12
    is murdered and mangled by the mob at Paris, v. 23

  Armagnac, the count, loses his territories for rebellion, ix. 357
    joins the duke of Guienne against Louis XI. xi. 118
    regains his city of Lectoure, xi. 144
    killed, xi. 147

  Armagnacs. See Orleans-faction.

  Arragon, a doctor of, preaches vehemently at the council of Pisa,
  against the rival popes, ii. 101
    the king of, is made prisoner by the duke of Milan, vii. 237
    flies from Perpignan, xi. 148
    sends an embassy to Louis XI., x. 164

  Arras, the inhabitants of, fortify it, and destroy several edifices
  which were around it, iv. 46
    is completely surrounded by the king's army, iv. 50
    account of various skirmishes during the siege of, iv. 51
    a treaty of peace is concluded before, iv. 58
    the peace of, is sworn to in sundry places, iv. 116, 119
    meeting of the commonalty and clergy of Amiens to swear to
    the peace of, iv. 119

  Arras, convention at, vii. 211
    peace of, between Charles VII. and the duke of Burgundy, vii. 240
    the cardinals, &c. leave, who had attended the convention, vii. 286
    punishment of many persons at, for sorcery, x. 45

  Arras, the men of, suffer another considerable defeat from
  the king's army, xi. 192
    submit to the king, xi. 256

  Arthur, count de Richemont, being delivered from imprisonment,
  assists at the siege of Meaux, v. 319
    joins the dauphin, vi. 67
    makes war on the heir of Commercy, vii. 330
    succeeds to the dukedom of Brittany, ix. 416
    dies, and is succeeded by the count d'Estampes, x. 10

  Artisans of Ghent excite the people to take up arms, viii. 67

  Artois, all sorts of crimes committed there with impunity, x. 99
    heavy taxes are imposed upon it to support the war, vii, 169
    is overrun by some French captains, vii. 101

  Asti, the county of, is yielded up to the duke of Orleans, viii. 418
    honourable reception of Charles VIII. at, xi. 394

  Athalia, queen of Jerusalem, fell through covetousness, i. 255

  Athol, the earl of, murders James I. in his bedchamber, viii. 3
    is put to death in a very cruel manner, viii. 4, 5

  Athol, the earl of, supposed reason for his putting the king to
  death, viii. 4

  Aubert de Canny, sir, suspected of being the murderer of the
  duke of Orleans, i. 198

  Aubert, sir, lord of Canny, is sent by the king of France, ambassador
  to the duke of Burgundy, iv. 300
    copy of the instructions given to him, iv. 303
    on his return from his embassy, is accused by the royal
    council, iv. 322

  Aubigny, the lord d', wins the town of Naples for Louis XII., xii. 74
    taken prisoner in Roussillon, xii. 97

  Aubusson, the cardinal of, grand master of Rhodes, dies, xii. 90

  Audeboeuf, Pierre, is quartered and hung, vii. 63

  Auffremont, the lord of, has the castle of Clermont delivered
  up to him, vii. 67

  Augsbourg, a virgin at, lives forty years without eating, drinking,
  or sleeping, xii. 128

  Augustins, the general of the order of, preaches before the council
  of Pisa, ii. 100

  Auvergne, Marcial d', a notary, leaps from a window in a fit
  of frenzy, xi. 22

  Aumale, destruction of the town of, iv. 288

  Aumale castle is conquered from the English by the lord de
  Longueval, vi. 299
    retaken by the English, vi. 324

  Auxarre, treaty of peace at, iii. 80

  Auxerre, the inhabitants of, take part with the duke of Burgundy, xi. 111
    make a sally and are defeated, xi. 130

  Aviemie, count de, i. 97

  Azincourt, battle of, iv. 172
    English lords at the battle, iv. 177

  Azincourt, king Henry's complete victory at, iv. 183
    names of the princes and other lords who perished or were made
    prisoners at this unfortunate battle, iv. 185-192
    many Frenchmen seek their relatives on the field of battle, iv. 196

  Azincourt, the lord d', slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 187


  B.

  Babylon, the treaty of peace between the king of, and the king of
  Cyprus is broken, vi. 75
    the sultan of, writes letters to the princes in Christendom, vi. 214

  Bacqueville, the lord de, iv. 146

  Baguey, battle of, v. 263

  Balim castle taken by sir John de Luxembourg, vii. 56

  Bajazet, his kingdom invaded by Tamerlane, i. 106
    is taken prisoner, i. 108

  Balthazar, cardinal of Bologna, elected pope, ii. 163. See John XXIII.

  Baluc, Nicholas, his marriage with the daughter of sir John
  Bureau, xi. 40

  Baluc, John, cardinal of Angers, employed in various commissions by
  Louis XI. xi. 47
    his treason and imprisonment, xi. 89
    set at liberty by the king, xi. 323

  Bauclinghen, the fortress of, taken by the English, iii. 41

  Bapaume surrendered to the king and the duke of Acquitaine, iv. 44

  Bar, the duchess, funeral of, i. 109

  Bar and Lorraine, the war is renewed between the dukes of, i. 161

  Bar, master John de, burnt as a sorcerer, i. 402

  Bar, the cardinal de, attends the council of Pisa, ii. 86

  Bar, Henry, duke of, dies, ii. 232

  Bar, the cardinal duke of, besieges the town and castle of
  Ligny en Barrois, v. 207
    the duke of, enters Vaudemont to conquer it by force, vii. 22
    is combated and defeated by the count de Vaudemont, vii. 35, 42
    is made prisoner, vii. 42
    his soldiers leave Vaudemont, vii. 51
    a peace is concluded between him and the count de Vaudemont, vii. 105
    peace between him and the counts de St Pol and de Loigny, vii. 107

  Bar, war recommences between the duchy of, and the county
  of Vaudemont, viii. 89

  Bar, the lady of, wife to the count of St Pol, dies, x. 98

  Barbasan, the lord de, lays siege to the castle of Anglure,
  held by the Burgundians, vii. 13

  Barrois and Lorrainers overrun the county of Vaudemont, viii. 220

  Basil, general council at, vii. 22
    a council is held at, to procure peace between France and
    England, vii. 150
    council of, a quarrel arises between the council and the pope, viii. 99

  Bassuel, Aussiel, master, beheaded, iv. 33

  Battaile, Nicolle, dies of grief for the infidelity of his wife, xi. 334

  Battailler, sir William, and sir John Carmien, combat between, ii. 83

  Batiller, Guillaume, killed at the siege of Bourges, iii. 60

  Battle between the Saracen and Spanish fleets, i. 323
    between the dukes of Burgundy and Hainault and the Liegeois, ii. 28
    of Azincourt, iv. 172
    of Herrings, vi. 253
    of Pataye, vi. 271
    of Gaveren, ix. 270
    of Rupelmonde, ix. 218
    of Hexham, x. 162
    of Montlehery, x. 245, 252
    of the duke of Burgundy and the duke of Lorraine before
    Nancy, xi. 248-253
    of Guinegate, xi. 315
    of St Aubin, xi. 369
    of Foroneuvo, xii. 24-30
    of Ravenna, xii. 135
    of Spurs, xii. 153
    of Flodden, xii. 159
    of Marignono, xii. 182

  Bavaria, Louis of, is presented with the castle of Marcoussi
  and appurtenances, ii. 137
    espouses the daughter of the king of Navarre, ii. 140
    is driven out of Paris, and his people robbed, iii. 24
    surrenders himself to the Parisians, iii. 53
    marries the widow of the lord de Navarre, iii. 24

  Bavaria, John of, declares war against his niece, daughter to
  the late duke William, iv. 263
    resigns his bishoprick of Liege, and marries the duchess
    of Luxembourg, iv. 264
    makes war on his niece in Holland, iv. 378

  Bayard, the captain, taken prisoner and carried to England, xii. 158

  Bayeux, siege of, by Charles VII. ix. 118

  Bayonne, siege of, by the counts de Foix and de Dunois, ix. 180
    surrenders, ix. 186

  Beaujeu, the lord of, betrayed to the count d'Armagnac, xi. 144
    marries the eldest daughter of Louis XI. xi. 156
    makes prisoner the duke of Nemours in the king's name, xi. 227
    arrives at Paris to receive the dauphiness from the hands
    of the Flemings, xi. 348

  Beaumont, the lord, dies of the bowel complaint, iv. 145

  Beaumont, the castle of, taken by the Burgundians, iv. 234

  Beaumont, in Argonne, siege of, vi. 224

  Beauvois, the duke of Burgundy is admitted into, iv. 330
    besieged and attacked by the duke of Burgundy, xi. 132

  Beaurain, John de, is put to flight by William de Coroam, vii. 139

  Bedford, the duke of, made regent of France, v. 381
    is married to Anne, daughter of the duke of Burgundy, vi. 33
    marches a large army to keep his appointment before Ivry, vi. 86
    combats the French, and gains a complete victory before
    Verneuil, vi. 89, 95
    he and the duke of Burgundy endeavour to make up the quarrel between
    the dukes of Gloucester and Brabant, vi. 109

  Bedford, the duke of, and the duke of Burgundy meet in the town
  of Dourlens, vi. 156
    prevents the combat between the dukes of Burgundy and
    Gloucester, vi. 168
    after a residence of eight months in England returns to Calais, vi. 178
    lays siege to Montargis, vi. 199
    his forces in France are reinforced by the earl of Salisbury, vi. 228
    wants to lay hands on the revenues of the church, vi. 232
    he and the duke of Burgundy renew their alliances, vi. 276
    assembles a large army to combat king Charles, vi. 287
    sends a letter to the king, _ib._
    his army meets that of the king's, vi. 292
    marches a large force to support the English and Burgundians
    at Lagny-sur-Marne, vii. 83
    marries the daughter of the count de St Pol, vii. 113
    goes to St Omer to meet the duke of Burgundy, vii. 116

  Bedford, duchess of, re-marries an English knight called
  sir Richard Woodville, vii. 397

  Belle-mocte, the castle of, remains firm to the Burgundians, iv. 52

  Bellême, siege of, iii. 306

  Bellême castle is taken by the duke d'Alençon, ix. 90.

  Belleville, siege of, by the Burgundians, vii. 172

  Benedict XIII. imposes a tax on his clergy, i. 124
    disclaimed throughout France, i. 166
    his reply to the French king's embassy, i. 304

  Benedict XIII. excommunicates the king and his adherents, i. 304
    the university of Paris declares against him, i. 315
    a renowned doctor in theology preaches against him at Paris, i. 316
    is condemned at the council of Pisa, ii. 90, 109
    causes a schism, vi. 86
    dies, vi. 72

  Bergerac, siege of, ix. 149

  Berry, the duke of, for himself and the rest of the princes of the
  blood, promises to relinquish his taxes, ii. 146
    retires from the court, ii. 151
    is remanded to Paris, ii. 156
    again quits Paris, ii. 173
    unites with the duke of Orleans and his party, ii. 174
    he, and the rest of the dukes in the Orleans faction,
    send letters to the king, ii. 180
    their letter to the town of Amiens, ii. 181
    appointed guardian of the duke of Acquitaine, ii. 203
    is refused his request to reside in the hôtel de Neelle, ii. 284
    is banished the realm, ii. 319
    he and the duke of Orleans send an embassy to the king of
    England, iii. 13
    is closely besieged in Bourges, iii. 54
    negotiates for peace, iii. 63
    his interview with the duke of Burgundy, iii. 69
    delivers up the keys of the city of Bourges, iii. 75

  Berry, the duke of, is taken dangerously ill, but recovers, iii. 95
    is waited upon by the Parisians relative to the treaty of
    peace at Arras, iv. 72
    offended at the appointment of the duke of Acquitaine to the
    sole management of the finances, he harangues the Parisians, iv. 81
    dies, and his duchy and county revert to the crown, iv. 225

  Berry, Mesnil, carver to the duke of Acquitaine, beheaded, iii. 175

  Bretagne, Gilles de, dies of a dysentery, iii. 77

  Bertrand de Chaumont beheaded, v. 230

  Bertrand, Jean de, is put to death, v. 27

  Birengueville, sir Robert de, killed at the siege of Mercq castle, i. 147

  Blanc, the chevalier, supposed to be the great Huniades, dies, ix. 365.
  See Noyelle, the lord de.

  Blaumount, the count de, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 186

  Blaye, siege of, ix. 160

  Blond, sir John le, iv. 160

  Blondell, sir John, takes the castle of Malmaison, vi. 205
    surrenders the castle, vi. 210

  Bocquiaux, the lord de, retakes the town of Compiègne, v. 34

  Bordeaux submits to the French, ix. 171
    is retaken by the earl of Shrewsbury, ix. 201
    the men of, are defeated by the lord d'Orval, ix. 154

  Bosqueaut, the lord de, is beheaded, vi. 10

  Boucicaut, the marshal, ii. 88
    the town of Genoa rebels against him, ii. 123

  Boucicaut, the marshal, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Boufillé, sir, a knight, challenged by an Arragonian knight, who fails
  to keep his engagement, appeals to the count de Dammartin, xi. 221

  Boulogne-sur-mer, castle of, sold by the governor to the English, x. 277
    the plot betrayed and frustrated, x. 278

  Boulonois, the constable of France marches into the, iii. 49
    continuation of the war in the, iii. 91
    are overrun by the French, vii. 208

  Bourbon, sir James de, is sent from France to the succour of the
  Welch against the English, i. 87
    takes the English fleet and destroys Plymouth harbour, i. 88

  Bourbon, duke of, annuls the confederation with the duke of Burgundy,
  and attaches himself to the duke of Orleans, ii. 272
    his war with Amé de Viry, a Savoyard, ii. 80
    strengthens his town of Clermont, ii. 279
    is personally banished the realm, ii. 319
    fiercely attacked near Villefranche, iii. 2
    his children liberated, iii. 11
    made prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194
    is attacked at Villefranche, vii. 172
    terms of peace between him and the duke of Burgundy, vii. 185
    and others form a design against the government of
    Charles VII. viii. 190
    he is reprimanded and pardoned by the king, viii. 194

  Bourbon, duke of, correspondence between him and Louis XI. x. 210
    joins the count de Charolois, x. 259
    takes the town of Rouen, x. 279
    Bourbon, duke Peter of, is appointed regent of France during the
    absence of Charles VIII. in Italy, xi. 386
    dies, xii. 87

  Bourbon, duke of, declares war against the king, and seizes all his
  finances in the Bourbonnois, x. 375
    his great successes against the Burgundians and Lombards, xi. 190
    the king issues a commission against him, xi. 319

  Bourbon, the bastard of, takes the town of la Mothe in
  Lorraine, viii. 177
    is drowned by order of the king of France, viii. 255

  Bourbon, the widow duchess of, comes to reside with her brother
  the duke of Burgundy, x. 118

  Bourbon, the lady Agnes of, dies, xi. 246

  Bourbon, Louis de, bishop of Liege, killed by sir William
  de la Mark, xi. 338

  Bourbon, the constable of, lieutenant-general for Francis I. in Italy,
  marches against the emperor Maximilian, xii. 198

  Bourdon, sir Louis, is arrested and executed, iv. 278
    his castle besieged by the duke of Acquitaine, ii. 350
    is taken prisoner, _ib._

  Bourges, siege of, iii. 54
    the wells of, poisoned by the Armagnacs, iii. 57
    the besieged break the truce, but are defeated, iii. 59

  Bourges, the besiegers decamp and lay siege to it on the opposite
  side, iii. 65
    the princes and lords within the city wait on the king and the
    duke of Acquitaine, iii. 73
    the keys of, presented to the duke of Acquitaine, iii. 75
    the archbishop of, harangues relative to the object of an
    embassy to the English, iv. 129

  Bournecte, M. fights a combat with Solsier Bunoige, i. 125

  Bournonville, Robinet de, iv. 180

  Boursier, Alexander, iii. 117

  Boussac, the marshal de, lays siege to the castle of Clermont, vi. 387

  Bouteiller, sir Guy de, deserts to the English, v. 73

  Boys, the lord du, attacks the English fleet near Brest harbour, i. 90

  Brabant, duke of, his quarrel with duke William, ii. 69
    assembles a large force at Paris, ii. 188
    his army quarrel with the army of the count Waleran de St Pol, _ib._
    slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Brabant, John, espouses his cousin german Jacquelina, countess
  of Bavaria, who was his godmother, v. 35
    quarrels with his duchess, who leaves him and goes to England, v. 247
    his wife is married to the duke of Gloucester, vi. 25
    his allies take the town of Braine, vi. 136
    receives the bull of pope Martin, vi. 144

  Brabant, John, dies, vi. 203

  Braine, the town of, taken by the allies of the duke of Brabant, vi. 136

  Brescia, the inhabitants of, put themselves under the dominion
  of Venice, xii. 122
    taken by the duke of Nemours with great slaughter, xii. 124

  Bretons, the, issue in arms from their country, and spread over
  Normandy, xi. 58
    take Merville, xi. 69

  Bresse, the countess of, lady Margaret of Bourbon, dies, xi. 349

  Brezé, sir Pierre de, sails from Honfleur, and lands at Sandwich, ix. 396
    takes it by storm, ix. 398-401

  Bridoul, Raoul, the king's secretary, struck with a battle-axe,
  and killed, iii. 147

  Brittany, the admiral of, attacks the English fleet near Brest
  harbour, i. 90
    undertakes an expedition against England, and is slain, i. 102

  Brittany, the duke of, comes to Paris, iii. 229
    his quarrel with the duke of Orleans, iii. 242
    quarrels also with the count d'Alençon, _ib._
    the duke of, carries on a sharp war against the old countess
    of Penthievre, ii. 121
    the duke of, arrives at Paris to treat with the king concerning the
    duke of Burgundy, iv. 209
    is made prisoner by the count de Penthievre, v. 249
    after an imprisonment of some months he is liberated, v. 254

  Brittany, is invaded by the English, vi. 216

  Brittany, Francis, duke of, puts his brother the lord Giles
  to death, viii. 407

  Brittany, Francis, duke of, makes complaint against the English
  on the loss of his town and castle of Fougares, viii. 427
    Francis, duke of, takes Avranches and many other places, ix. 117
    dies, ix. 416
    succeeded by his brother Arthur, count de Richemont, _ib._

  Brittany, Arthur, duke of, decision of the three estates
  respecting him, xi. 62
    is reconciled to the king, xi. 71
    refuses to wear the king's order, xi. 93
    makes peace with the king, xi. 101
    armour which he had ordered from Milan seized by the king's
    officers, xi. 328
    dies, xi. 368

  Broye castle is taken by the English, vii. 387

  Bruges, sends deputies to the captain-general of Ghent, viii. 76
    peace between the town and the duke of Burgundy, viii. 84
    the town of, rebels, viii. 13
    the populace attack the duke of Burgundy, viii. 19
    the men of, lay the Low Countries under contribution, viii. 31
    begin to subside in their rebellion, viii. 47
    the dukes of Burgundy and Orleans visit it, viii. 239
    jousts are held at, viii. 242
    a tournament performed at, before the duke of Burgundy, xi. 67

  Brussels, a grand tournament at, vi. 244

  Bruyeres, the town of, is won from the French by sir John
  de Luxembourg, vii. 131

  Buchan, earl of, defeated and killed by the duke of Bedford
  at Verneuil, vi. 93

  Bucy, Oudart de, attorney-general of Arras is beheaded, xi. 259

  Bude, William, iii. 104

  Bull of the pope della Luna, by which he excommunicates the
  king of France and others, i. 309

  Bull of pope Alexander V. on his election, ii. 111

  Burdet, sir Nicholas, is killed at St Denis, viii. 301

  Burdon de Salligny, sir, arrested by orders of the duke
  of Burgundy, iii. 94

  Burgundians, the king's party and they, after the death of duke John,
  form acquaintances with the English, v. 160
    and the Dauphinois draw up in battle array against each other
    at Mons in Vimeu, v. 290
    the lords assemble in arms to conduct thither their lord
    from Picardy, v. 310
    march to meet the Dauphinois at d'Airaines, v. 329
    enter into a strict alliance with the English, before the battle
    of Crevant, vi. 43
    are defeated by the French under Charles VII. in Dauphiny, vi. 372
    decamp in disgrace from before Compiègne, vi. 385
    are conquered by the French during their march to Guerbigny, vi. 389
    are assisted at Lagny sur Marne by the duke of Bedford, vii. 83
    under pretence of being English, gain the castle of La Bone, vii. 96
    conquer many castles, vii. 161
    appear before Villefranche, vii. 87
    a truce is agreed upon with La Hire and his men, vii. 208

  Burgundians, the French and they are on amicable terms in Arras, vii. 230
    are ill used by the Londoners after the peace of Arras, vii. 291, 292
    they are suspected by the English, vii. 306

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, goes to take possession of Brittany, i. 42
    makes preparations for the marriage of his second son with the daughter
    of the count de Waleran, i. 88
    makes a journey to Bar-le-duc and to Brussels, i. 109
    dies at Halle, in Hainault, i. 111
    his body is carried to the Carthusian convent at Dijon
    in Burgundy, i. 112
    his death universally lamented, i. 113

  Burgundy, John, duke of, goes to Paris, and causes the dauphin
  and queen to return thither, i. 337
    his petition to the king of France, i. 141
    reconciled to the duke of Orleans, i. 155
    obtains the government of Picardy, i. 157
    holds a council at Douay concerning the king's order for
    disbanding his army, i. 173
    departs from Paris on account of the affairs of Liege, i. 320
    reply to his charges against the duke of Orleans, i. 333
    compared to Cain, i. 346
    his great pride and obstinacy, i. 359
    covetousness the cause of his murder of the duke of Orleans, i. 363

  Burgundy, John, duke of, a cutting apostrophe to, on his murder
  of the duke of Orleans, i. 379
    his dissimulation exposed, i. 383
    his contradictory confessions, i. 385
    reply to his libel against the duke, i. 389
    the duchess of Orleans' proposed punishment of, ii. 7
    assembles men at arms to defend John of Bavaria, ii. 19
    is informed of the duchess of Orleans' demands respecting his
    punishment, ii. 20
    his great courage at the battle near Tongres with the Liegeois, ii. 35
    gives no quarter to the prisoners, ii. 36
    sends a message to the king to inform him of his victory over
    the Liegeois, ii. 37
    returns to Flanders, ii. 42
    names of the lords who attended him on his expedition, _ib._
    a council is held at Paris to consider on the manner of proceeding
    against him, ii. 59
    the king's letters of pardon to, annulled, ii. 60
    measures against him stopped in consequence of his victory over
    the Liegeois, ii. 61
    surnamed "Jean sans peur," ii. 62
    resolves to oppose all his enemies, _ib._
    marches an army towards Paris, ii. 64
    public rejoicings on his arrival, ii. 65
    negotiations respecting his peace with the king, ii. 66
    terms of his reconciliation, ii. 68
    ceremonials of his reconciliation, ii. 72

  Burgundy, John, duke of, intreats a reconciliation with the children
  of Orleans, ii. 73
    holds a council at Lille, ii. 120
    makes magnificent presents at Paris, ii. 149
    undertakes the education of the duke of Acquitaine, ii. 150
    is suspicious of the conduct of the Orleans-party, ii. 176
    assembles a large army, ii. 177
    prepares for defence against Charles duke of Orleans, ii. 217
    ambassadors are sent against him from the duke of Orleans, ii. 223
    is accused at great length in a letter to the king, ii. 236
    greatly alarmed at the hostility of the duke of Orleans, ii. 263
    receives a challenge from the duke, ii. 265
    his answer to the duke of Orleans' challenge, ii. 269
    is discontented with sir Mansart du Bos, _ib._
    his letter to the duke of Bourbon reminding the duke of his
    treaties of alliance, ii. 270
    writes to the bailiff of Amiens, ii. 273
    invades the county of Clermont, ii. 280
    assembles an immense army and besieges the town of Ham, ii. 288
    is deserted by the Flemings, ii. 302
    assembles another army to march to Paris, ii. 307
    much intercourse takes place between him and Henry, king of
    England, _ib._

  Burgundy, John, duke of, is in danger of being assassinated at
  Pontoise, ii. 315
    marches a large army to Paris, ii. 320
    his reception in that city, ii. 321
    leads a great army to St Cloud, ii. 326
    marches to conquer Estampes and Dourdan, ii. 348
    pleads with the duke of Acquitaine respecting peace with the
    Armagnacs, iii. 67
    has an interview with the duke of Berry before Bourges during
    the siege, iii. 69, 71
    rides on the same horse with the duke of Orleans, iii. 83
    has the rule of the nation, iii. 96
    is threatened by the duke of Acquitaine, iii. 147
    endeavours to appease the Parisian mob, iii. 155
    quits Paris in fear, iii. 215
    holds a council at Lille, iii. 230
    is in great fear that his enemies would turn the king
    against him, iii. 235
    is waited upon by the earl of Warwick, and others, _ib._
    is advised to march towards Paris with an army, iii. 242
    gives a grand entertainment at Lille, iii. 246
    is commanded by ambassadors from the king to make no treaty with
    the English, and to surrender his castles, _ib._
    his daughter is sent back from the king of Sicily, iii. 264
    writes letters to the king of France, containing
    remonstrances, iii. 265
    goes to Antwerp, where he holds a council, iii. 283

  Burgundy, John, duke of, writes letters to all the principal towns
  in Picardy, iii. 286
    marches a large force towards Paris, iii. 299
    arrives at St Denis, iii. 306
    sends his king at arms to the duke of Acquitaine, iii. 307
    is positively refused admittance into Paris, iii. 308
    retires from before Paris, and writes letters to the principal
    towns of France, iii. 310
    sends his king at arms to the king and his ministers, iii. 314
    retreats to Compiègne, iii. 315
    goes to Arras and holds a council, iii. 317
    writes, from Arras, letters to the principal towns, iii. 318
    is deprived of all the favours formerly done to him by the king
    of France, iii. 334
    holds a grand council at Arras, and is promised support, iv. 15
    forms alliances and goes into Flanders, iv. 40
    garrisons different towns and castles, _ib._
    peace between him and the king, iv. 60
    marches a force into Burgundy, iv. 83
    besieges the castle of Tonnerre, iv. 85
    besieges Château-Belin, and gives the castle to his son the
    count de Charolois, iv. 86
    peace between him and the king again concluded, iv. 98
    sends ambassadors to the duke of Acquitaine, iv. 133
    takes the oath to observe peace with the king of France, iv. 135

  Burgundy, John, duke of, makes war on Cambray, iv. 147
    the lords of Picardy are prevented by him from obeying the summons
    of the king, to arm against the English, iv. 153
    is grieved at the result of the battle of Azincourt, yet prepares to
    march a large army to Paris, iv. 200
    vows revenge against the king of Sicily, iv. 204
    is refused admittance, with an armed force, into Paris, _ib._
    again quits the vicinity of Paris and marches into Lille, iv. 210
    is called by the Parisians Jean de Lagny, _ib._
    several persons of his faction are banished at Amiens, on suspicion of
    being concerned in the late conspiracy, iv. 225. See also Conspiracy.
    a truce is concluded between him and England, iv. 227
    open war is declared between him and the Orleans-faction and
    the king, iv. 244
    increases his men at arms, iv. 245
    meets the emperor of Germany and the king of England at Calais, iv. 247
    goes to Valenciennes, in obedience to a summons which he
    receives from the dauphin, iv. 250
    swears mutual friendship towards duke William, count of
    Hainault, iv. 250
    sends letters to many of the principal towns of France,
    on the state of the nation, iv. 265
    the foreign companies attached to his party commit great
    mischiefs, iv. 286

  Burgundy, John, duke of, sends ambassadors to many of the king's
  principal towns, to form alliances with them, iv. 292
    threatens the lord de Canny, and returns answers to the charges
    of the king against him, iv. 300, 302
    orders are issued against him, iv. 328
    continues his march towards Paris, iv. 329
    several towns and forts surrender to him, in which he places
    captains and governors, _ib._
    crosses the river Oise, at l'Isle-Adam, iv. 334
    besieges and conquers Beaumont and Pontoise, iv. 335, 336
    fixes his standard near Paris, and calls the place "the camp
    of the withered tree," iv. 343
    sends his herald to the king in Paris, iv. 344
    being forbidden an interview with the king, leaves Mont Chastillon,
    and makes several conquests, iv. 346
    sends letters to the principal towns in France, iv. 348
    raises the siege of Corbeil, and attends a request of the queen
    of France at Tours, iv. 355
    marches his whole army to Paris, iv. 372
    being repulsed, marches with the queen to Troyes, iv. 375
    visits the emperor Sigismund at Montmeliart, iv. 388
    is visited by the cardinals d'Orsini and di San Marco, v. 1

  Burgundy, John, duke of, peace is again attempted to be made between
  him and the rest of the princes of the blood, v. 4
    his troops take the city of Paris, and are joined by the
    Parisians, v. 9
    his badge, a St Andrew's cross, is worn by the Parisians, v. 16
    many towns and castles submit to him, v. 18
    carries the queen to Paris, v. 24
    is made governor of Paris, v. 26
    orders the government of Paris according to his pleasure, v. 53
    has an interview with the dauphin, v. 93
    is summoned by the dauphin to meet him at Montereau, v. 113
    is cautioned respecting his interview with the dauphin, v. 116
    resolves to meet the dauphin, v. 117
    his last interview with the dauphin, v. 120
    is struck with a battle-axe by sir Tanneguy, v. 121
    is barbarously murdered, _ib._
    names of the principal actors in the conspiracy against him, v. 123
    is interred in the church of our Lady at Montereau, v. 127

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, the count de Charolois, holds a council
  on the state of his affairs, and concludes a truce with the
  English, v. 142
    orders a funeral service to be performed in the church of St Vaast,
    at Arras, for his late father, v. 146
    lays siege to Crespy, v. 164

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, enters Troyes, v. 168
    the greater part of his army disbanded, v. 178
    makes a formal complaint to the king respecting the murder
    of his father, v. 234
    marches to Pont de St Remy and conquers it, v. 280
    lays siege to the town of St Riquier, v. 284
    breaks up the siege to combat the Dauphinois, v. 286
    obtains a great victory over the Dauphinois at Mons, v. 293
    departs from Hesdin, v. 302
    enters into a treaty with his prisoners for the surrender of
    St Riquier, v. 307
    he and the count de St Pol depart from Arras, and wait on the kings
    of France and England, v. 315
    returns to the duchy of Burgundy, v. 317
    death of his duchess, v. 319
    he, and the dukes or Bedford and of Brittany form a triple
    alliance, vi. 29
    he and the duke of Bedford endeavour to make up the quarrel between
    the dukes of Gloucester and of Brabant, vi. 109
    marries the widow of his uncle, the count de Nevers, vi. 111
    makes preparations to aid his cousin, the duke of Brabant, vi. 115
    his answer to the duke of Gloucester's letter, vi. 122
    returns to Flanders, and answers the duke of Gloucester's
    second letter, vi. 132
    meets the duke of Bedford in the town of Dourlens, vi. 156

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, makes preparations to combat the
  duke of Gloucester, vi. 162
    the combat is prevented, vi. 168
    defeats the lord Fitzwalter in Holland, vi. 172
    returns to Holland and besieges the town of Zenenberche, which
    surrenders to him, vi. 178
    attacks the town of Hermontfort, vi. 211
    treaty between him and the duchess Jacqueline, vi. 226
    resolves to finish the war in Holland, vi. 226
    escorts the duchess Jacqueline into Hainault, vi. 228
    attends a grand tournament at Brussels, vi. 244
    is made heir to the count de Namur, vi. 246
    comes to Paris, vi. 276
    sends ambassadors to Amiens, vi. 307
    conducts his sister back to Paris in great pomp to her lord
    the duke of Bedford, vi. 310
    marries, for the third time, the lady Isabella of Portugal, vi. 325
    institutes the order of the Golden Fleece, vi. 329
    quarters his army at Gournay sur Aronde, vi. 336
    besieges the castle of Choisy, vi. 339
    encamps his army before Compiègne, vi. 349
    sends the lord de Croy to the county of Namur, against the
    Liegeois, vi. 355

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, takes possession of the duchy of
  the duke of Brabant, vi. 362
    refuses to give battle to the French, vi. 393
    his new-born child is christened, and dies, vi. 399
    visits Burgundy with a thousand armed men, vii. 63
    he and his duchess go into Holland, vii. 97
    assumes the title of count of Hainault, Holland, and Zealand,
    and lord of Frizeland, vii. 98
    his duchess is brought to bed of a son at Ghent, vii. 106
    renews the coin at Ghent, _ib._
    loses several of his castles, vii. 110
    a treaty of peace is concluded between him and the Liegeois, vii. 112
    goes to St Omer, to meet the duke of Bedford, vii. 116
    differs with the duke, vii. 117
    determines to augment his army in defence of his county of
    Burgundy, vii. 123
    reconquers many of his places, vii. 128
    keeps his appointment before Passy, vii. 132
    besieges the town and castle of Avalon, _ib._
    his duchess is delivered of a son, who is knighted at the
    font, vii. 147
    holds the feast of the Golden Fleece at Dijon, vii. 148
    attends the marriage of the daughter of the king of Cyprus, _ib._

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, returns from Burgundy to Flanders, vii. 154
    agrees on terms for a peace with the duke of Bourbon, vii. 181
    returns, with his duchess, from Burgundy, vii. 193
    is displeased with the inhabitants of Antwerp, vii. 203
    attends the convention of Arras, vii. 217
    his duchess arrives at the convention of Arras, vii. 220
    peace is concluded between him and Charles VII. at Arras, vii. 242
    appoints different officers to the towns and fortresses that had been
    conceded to him by the peace, vii. 286
    in consequence of the peace of Arras sends some of his council
    and heralds to the king of England to remonstrate and explain the
    causes of the peace, vii. 288
    determines to make war on the English, vii. 313
    resolves to make an attack on Calais, vii. 318
    his standard is raised at all the gates of Paris, vii. 329
    marches with a great force to the siege of Calais, vii. 355
    receives a challenge of the duke of Gloucester, vii. 367
    holds many councils respecting the best means of opposing
    the English, viii. 8
    enters Bruges to quell the rebellion there, viii. 15
    makes his escape from Bruges, viii. 20

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, resolves to punish the rebels at
  Bruges, viii. 22
    resolves to avoid a general action with the English, viii. 54
    peace is concluded between him and the town of Bruges, viii. 84
    sends an embassy to the pope, viii. 100
    sends the lord de Crevecœur to the French court to negociate
    a marriage between his only son and the king's second
    daughter, viii. 101
    procures the ransom of the duke of Orleans, a prisoner in
    England, viii. 226
    holds the feast of the Golden Fleece, viii. 310
    destroys the fortress of Montaign, viii. 276
    some knights and gentlemen of his house hold a tournament
    near to Dijon, viii. 351
    sends an army into the duchy of Luxembourg, viii. 359
    reduces the duchy to his obedience, viii. 365
    attempts to lay a tax on salt in Flanders, ix. 157
    raises an army to quell the insurrection in Flanders, ix. 193
    sends an army against the Ghent men at Oudenarde, ix. 202
    establishes garrisons round Ghent, ix. 210
    invades the county of Waes, ix. 211
    defeats the Ghent men at the battle of Rupelmonde, ix. 220
    burns the village of Acre, ix. 222

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, refuses to make peace in Flanders at the
  king's request, ix. 223
    articles of peace proposed to him from France on behalf of the
    Ghent men, ix. 230
    raises a large army to combat the Ghent men, ix. 238
    sends an army against some Germans in Luxembourg, ix. 259
    enters Flanders with a large force to make war on Ghent, _ib._
    takes the castle of Poulcreas, ix. 262
    sends to know if the Ghent men would submit to his will, ix. 279
    treaty of peace between him and the Ghent men, ix. 280
    vows to undertake an expedition to Turkey, ix. 289
    makes a great feast, ix. 292
    goes into Germany, ix. 295
    raises men and money to make war against the Turks, ix. 353
    tries to procure the bishopric of Utrecht for his bastard son
    David, ix. 355
    sends a body of troops, and the chapter accept him, ix. 372
    besieges Deventer, ix. 373
    affords refuge to the dauphin, and sends an embassy to the
    king, ix. 386
    quarrels with his son, but is reconciled by the dauphin, ix. 389
    carries the dauphin to Bruges, ix. 402
    his coolness with the count de St Pol, ix. 406
    his answer to the king respecting the youth of Rodemac, ix. 418

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, makes his entry into the town of
  Ghent, ix. 420
    rejects a proposal from England, of alliance by marriage, ix. 426
    his reply to the king's summons to attend the trial of the duke
    of Alençon, ix. 438
    forbidden by the king to attend, sends proxies, x. 2
    sends an embassy to the pope, and fortifies his towns against
    the English, x. 11
    reconciled to the count of St Pol, receives an embassy from
    Greece, x. 12
    holds the feast of the Golden Fleece at St Omer, x. 63
    attends the coronation of Louis XI. x. 72
    does homage for his duchy, and swears allegiance, x. 75
    his magnificent welcome of the king to Paris, x. 77-84
    takes leave of the king, and departs to Cambray, x. 87
    taken dangerously ill, but recovers, x. 96
    causes a number of rogues and vagabonds in his country of Artois
    to be executed, x. 114
    his sister the duchess of Bourbon comes to reside with him, x. 118
    sends an embassy to the pope respecting his vow against the
    grand Turk, x. 124
    meets the king of France at Hêdin, x. 113
    prepares to join the pope against the Turks, x. 138

  Burgundy, Philip, duke of, a coolness between him and his son the count
  de Charolois, x. 141
    peace restored between them, x. 153
    goes to Lille to wait on the king, x. 157
    what passed between him and the king at Hêdin, x. 167
    answers the remonstrances of the king's chancellor at Lille, x. 177
    sends an embassy to the king of France, x. 185
    taken dangerously ill, x. 193
    recovers, and vents his anger against his son for dismissing the
    lord de Quievrain, x. 194
    letters from the duke of Berry, x. 211, 215
    pardons his son, x. 224
    orders men to be raised to aid the duke of Berry against his
    brother Louis XI. x. 225
    sends a sum of money to his son after the battle of Montlehery, x. 273
    prepares an army against Liege, x. 320
    takes and demolishes Dinant, x. 328, 335
    dies. Grand obsequies for him in the church of St Donnast
    in Bruges, x. 348

  Burgundy, the duke Charles of, suspected by the king of being
  friendly to the English, xi. 95
    orders a fleet to cruise and intercept the earl of Warwick
    on his return to England, xi. 101
    takes the field with his army during a truce, xi. 126
    razes and sets on fire the town of Nesle, xi. 127

  Burgundy, the duke Charles of, lays siege to Beauvois, xi. 129
    makes a disgraceful retreat from before it, xi. 138
    shameful conduct of his army in Normandy, xi. 141
    sends to Venice to negociate a loan, xi. 155
    reported to have formed a conspiracy for poisoning the king, xi. 162
    concludes a truce with the king, xi. 169
    lays siege to Nuys, and takes several towns, notwithstanding
    the truce, xi. 173
    his losses before Nuys, and conquests gained over him in Picardy
    and Burgundy, xi. 179
    his disgraceful decampment and flight from before Nuys, xi. 193
    concludes a truce with the king, xi. 201
    delivers the constable, Louis de Luxembourg, to the king's
    officers, xi. 205
    is defeated by the Swiss at Granson, xi. 224
    borrows money to raise forces to retaliate on the Swiss, xi. 231
    defeated in Swisserland by the duke of Lorraine, xi. 235
    his death, and total destruction of his army by the duke of
    Lorraine, xi. 248, 255

  Burgundy, the duchess of, daughter of the king of Portugal, waits
  upon the king of France at Laon, viii. 269
    the duchess returns to Quesnoy, viii. 373

  Burnel, the lord, iv. 145

  Bust, Oudin du, executed for instigating the murder of
  Petit John, xi. 271


  C.

  Caen, siege of, by Charles VII. ix. 123
    description of the castle of, ix. 128
    surrenders by capitulation, _ib._

  Cain, and John duke of Burgundy compared, i. 346

  Calabria, the duke of, goes to treat of a marriage with the
  duke of Burgundy's daughter, xi. 125
    dies of the plague, xi. 153

  Calais, siege of, by the Burgundians, vii. 350
    a fruitless attempt is made to choak up the harbour, vii. 368
    a meeting is held at this town to consult about peace, viii. 218

  Calixtus III. pope, his regulations respecting a croisade, ix. 360
    dies, ix. 425

  Cambray, quarrel between the inhabitants of, and the canons of the
  chapter of St Gery, iv. 147
    the league of, between the emperor Maximilian, the king of France
    and the king of Spain against the Venetians, xii. 112

  Cambridge, the earl of, proceeds from Rouen to raise the siege of
  Meaux, viii. 158

  Cambyses, king, his rigorous love of justice, i. 342

  Campo Basso, the count de, leaves the duke of Burgundy, and claims
  relationship with the duke of Brittany, who receives him well, xi. 228
    joins the duke of Lorraine, xi. 248

  Canons of the chapter of St Gery in Cambray quarrel with the
  inhabitants, iv. 147
    they are restored to their church, iv. 151

  Capistrain, sir John, his success against the infidels in
  Hungary, ix. 362
    rallies the Christians at the siege of Belgrade, ix. 379

  Cappleuche, the hangman of Paris, heads a mob against the
  Armagnacs, v. 49
    beheaded, v. 50

  Carlefin castle besieged by Charles d'Albreth, constable of
  France, i. 119

  Carmen, Jean, i. 96

  Carny, the lord de, taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Carquelevant, a Breton, his treason in the town of Arras, xi. 373

  Carrier, James. See Xancoins.

  Castellan, Otho, accused of diabolical arts against the king of
  France, ix. 370

  Castille, the king of, forms an alliance with Louis XI. xi. 303

  Catherine, daughter of the duke of Burgundy, is sent back by the
  king of Sicily, iii. 264
    dies, iii. 265

  Catherine, youngest daughter of Charles VI. marries Henry V.
  of England, v. 183
    crowned queen at London, v. 245
    is brought to bed of a son and heir, v. 319
    returns to France in grand state, v. 343

  Catherine, the daughter of Charles VII. is sent to the duke of Burgundy
  at St Omer, conformably to the treaty of marriage between her and the
  count de Charolois, viii. 174

  Caudie, duke de, i. 97

  Celestins, the convent of the, at Lyons, nearly destroyed by
  fire, xii. 75

  Chalais, siege of, ix. 151

  Champigneux castle, siege of, by Toumelaire, vi. 361

  Chancery of France, iii. 119

  Chantoceau, siege of, v. 254

  Chappes, siege of, vi. 343

  Chargny, the lord de, combats sir John de Mello, at Arras, vii. 223

  Charlemagne, St. king of France, the festival of, xi. 178

  Charles, the duke of Berry, only brother to Louis XI. withdraws
  from the court of France and takes refuge with the duke of
  Brittany, x. 208
    his letters to the duke of Burgundy, x. 211, 215
    joins the count de Charolois after the battle of Montlehery, x. 259
    does homage to the king for the duchy of Normandy, x. 299
    his entry into Rouen, x. 303, xi. 6
    dispossessed of his duchy by the king, leaves Normandy, xi. 14
    decision of the three estates respecting his appanage, xi. 60
    declares his willingness to accept the appanage and be reconciled to
    the king, xi. 71
    created duke of Guienne,--is completely reconciled to his
    brother, xi. 88, 91
    accompanies the king to Paris and Orleans, xi. 116
    discontented with the court, forms an alliance with the count
    d'Armagnac, xi. 118
    dies, xi. 126. See Berry, duke of.

  Charles, dauphin of Vienne, continues the war against the
  Burgundians, v. 32
    the dauphiness is sent to him, v. 52

  Charles, dauphin of Vienne, continues a vigorous war against the
  Burgundians, v. 83
    treaty of peace between him and the duke, v. 94
    the treaty between him and the duke is proclaimed through
    France, v. 307
    summons the duke of Burgundy to Montereau, v. 113
    most treacherously murders the duke of Burgundy, v. 121
    his conduct after the murder of the duke, v. 126
    writes letters in defence of the murder of the duke of
    Burgundy, v. 133
    departs from Montereau, v. 140
    makes preparations against any attack after the alliance between
    England and France, v. 173
    subdues the greater part of the towns and castles in Languedoc, v. 206
    sentence is denounced against him, v. 236, 237
    is summoned by the parliament to appear at the table of marble, v. 260
    besieges Chartres, v. 271
    retreats to Tours, v. 275
    receives intelligence of the death of his father, vi. 8
    is crowned king, by the nobles of his party at Poitiers, vi. 382
    his lady is brought to bed of a son, called Louis, dauphin of Vienne,
    vi. 65. See Charles VII.

  Charles VI. surnamed the well-beloved, i. 7
    prudent commencement of his reign, i. 8

  Charles VI. is seized with a fit of insanity on his march
  against Brittany, i. 9
    evil consequences of his disorder, i. 10
    his family, i. 10, 11
    makes regulations relative to the succession, i. 210
    sends an embassy to the pope, i. 302
    is strongly urged to do justice in the case of the duke of
    Orleans, i. 341
    holds a conference to consider on the manner of proceeding against
    the duke of Burgundy, ii. 59
    is carried to Tours, ii. 63
    pardons the duke of Burgundy, ii. 72
    has a return of his disorder, ii. 73
    recovers, and witnesses two combats, ii. 83
    summons a council of many lords, i. 138
    names of the lords who attended, ii. 142
    holds many councils on the state of the nation, ii. 144
    resolves to wage war against Henry of England, ii. 146
    disbands his troops, ii. 150
    has a relapse of his disorder, ib.
    marches out of Paris to regain the castle of Creil, ii. 175
    gives orders for all persons to arm, ii. 189
    resolves to give battle to the Orleans faction, ii. 193
    holds a council on the state of the government, ii. 194
    is again seized with his usual malady, ii. 204

  Charles VI. recovers, ii. 221
    forbids hostilities between the dukes of Orleans and of
    Burgundy, ii. 222
    sends an embassy to the duke of Burgundy, ii. 233
    relapses again into his former disorder, ii. 277
    is removed by the Parisians to the Louvre, ii. 280
    commands, by the regent, all persons to aid him against
    the Orleans faction, ii. 286
    issues a proclamation to the bailiff of Amiens, ii. 315
    sends the count de St Pol against the Armagnacs, ii. 337
    sends different captains to harass the Armagnacs, iii. 1
    sends ambassadors to England to treat of a marriage between the duke
    of Burgundy's daughter and the prince of Wales, iii. 8
    holds a council on the intercepted letters of the Armagnacs
    to England, iii. 10
    marches with a large force from Paris to Bourges, iii. 29
    resolves not to return to Paris till he has reduced the
    Armagnacs to obedience, iii. 41
    receives information of his enemies' alliance with England, iii. 49
    lays siege to Fontenoy and to Bourges, iii. 52
    decamps, and lays siege to Bourges on the opposite side, iii. 65
    a peace negociated on his part with the Armagnacs, iii. 70
    great sickness in his army, iii. 72
    decamps from before the town of Bourges, iii. 76

  Charles VI. arrives at Auxerre, iii. 77
    recovers his health, and ratifies the treaty of Auxerre, iii. 84
    his edict respecting the peace between the Burgundians
    and the Armagnacs, iii. 85
    returns to Paris after the peace, iii. 92
    various underhand attempts are made by the factions to obtain
    his favour, iii. 97
    holds a grand assembly on the abuses of government, iii. 98
    his ministers are greatly alarmed at the arrest of sir Peter des
    Essars and other delinquents, iii. 144
    publishes an edict forbidding any armaments in the kingdom, iii. 149
    publishes an edict of indemnity to the Parisians, iii. 160
    publishes sundry edicts,--one against sir Clugnet de
    Brabant, iii. 167, 200
    publishes a proclamation respecting the charges against the
    Orleans party, iii. 217
    publishes another royal edict respecting peace, iii. 236
    another edict to forbid any persons from bearing arms, iii. 244
    fearful that the peace would be broken, publishes other
    edicts, iii. 248, 254
    issues an edict relative to the coin, iii. 252
    his edict, forbidding knights or esquires to obey the summons of
    any lord, iii. 260
    issues a summons to oppose the duke of Burgundy, iii. 294
    gives orders to raise forces against the duke of Burgundy, iii. 324

  Charles VI. issues an edict, depriving the duke of Burgundy of all
  his favours, iii. 333
    issues various edicts against the duke, charging him with attempting
    to seduce his subjects, iv. 2
    sends letters patent to the nobles of Artois, forbidding them to
    aid the duke, iv. 13
    a grand council is held at Paris in his name, iv. 17
    marches out of Paris with a large army against the duke, iv. 21
    marches from Soissons to St Quintin, iv. 35
    peace proclaimed between him and the duke, iv. 60
    returns to Paris, iv. 83
    has solemn obsequies performed for him, iv. 93
    sends forces to attack the Burgundians, iv. 95
    peace again concluded, iv. 98
    holds a grand festival, iv. 99
    his royal letters relative to the peace, iv. 100
    collects a great army to oppose the English, iv. 152
    issues a summons for the army against the English, iv. 153
    holds a council at Rouen, and resolves fighting the English, iv. 164
    is much grieved on hearing the melancholy event of the battle of
    Azincourt, iv. 200
    fills up the vacant places in the government occasioned by the
    misfortune at Azincourt, iv. 208

  Charles VI. a negociation is opened for a truce between him and the
  king of England, iv. 227
    publishes an edict, complaining of the depredations of the
    Burgundians, iv. 235
    open war is declared between him and the Burgundians, iv. 244
    his garrison in Peronne carries on a severe war against the
    countries attached to the duke of Burgundy, iv. 290
    attacks Senlis, iv. 383
    sends ambassadors to treat of a peace with the queen and the duke
    of Burgundy, iv. 384
    raises the siege of Senlis, and returns to Paris, iv. 397
    peace is again attempted to be made between him and the
    Burgundians, v. 4
    is compelled to ride through the streets of Paris with the
    Burgundians, v. 10
    is conveyed to the Louvre, v. 14
    he and the duke of Burgundy send captains for the defence
    of Rouen, v. 37
    is governed in all things by the duke of Burgundy, v. 53
    sends an embassy to the English at Pont de l'Arche, v. 56
    engages to espouse his youngest daughter Catherine to the
    king of England, v. 170
    is wholly under the management of Henry V. v. 212
    issues edicts, declaring Henry V. heir, and regent of
    the realm, v. 214
    is very much degraded and humbled, v. 345
    goes with Henry V. from Paris to Senlis, v. 346
    dies at his hôtel of St Pol, vi. 1

  Charles VI. is buried at St Denis, vi. 5
    news of his death is carried to the dauphin, vi. 8

  Charles VII. is crowned king by the nobles of his party
  at Poitiers, vi. 11
    many French lords turn to his party, vi. 83
    a maiden, named Joan, waits on him at Chinon, whom he
    retains in his service, vi. 254
    sends ambassadors to Paris to negociate a peace with the
    regent, vi. 257
    sends a large reinforcement to Orleans, vi. 265
    takes the field with a numerous body of chivalry and men
    at arms, vi. 280
    many towns and castles submit to him on his march, _ib._
    arrives at Rheims, vi. 283
    is crowned by the archbishop, vi. 285
    his armies meet those of the duke of Bedford at Mont
    Epiloy, vi. 292
    sends ambassadors to the duke of Burgundy at Arras, vi. 296
    attacks Paris, vi. 303
    returns to Touraine and Berry, vi. 309
    some of his captains make an attempt on Corbie, vii. 12
    his party conquer the city of Chartres, vii. 70
    peace is concluded between him and the Burgundians, vii. 242
    his queen is brought to bed of a son, who is named Philip,
    after the duke of Burgundy, vii. 323

  Charles VII. the city of Paris is reduced to obedience to him, vii. 328
    orders his captains to reconquer some towns and castles from
    the English, viii. 25
    marches in person against Montereau, viii. 26
    makes his first entry into Paris, after its reduction, viii. 39
    account of the preparations for his entry into Paris, viii. 40
    his dress and equipage, viii. 43
    compels Roderigo de Villandras to make war on England, viii. 114
    the dauphin and many great lords quit his court in disgust, viii. 188
    refuses, or delays, to see the duke of Orleans on his release
    from England, viii. 248
    goes to Troyes in Champagne, viii. 254
    several towns and forts submit to his obedience, _ib._
    lays siege to Creil, viii. 278
    marches to the siege of Pontoise, viii. 280
    reconquers Pontoise, viii. 303
    remonstrances are sent to him by the nobles assembled at
    Nevers, viii. 305
    his answer, viii. 306
    marches an army to Tartas, viii. 333
    having gained Tartas, conquers St Severe, and others in
    Gascony, viii. 337
    assembles an army to march into Normandy, viii. 348
    a truce is concluded between him and the king of England, viii. 379

  Charles VII. the truce between him and the king of England is
  renewed for eight months, viii. 390
    sends an embassy to England, viii. 403
    ditty found on his bed after his return from mass, viii. 405
    sends ambassadors to pope Nicholas V. viii. 420
    sends to England to complain of a breach of the truce by
    sir Francis de Surienne, in Normandy, viii. 429
    being satisfied that the English had broken the truce, makes
    war against them, viii. 445
    summons Mantes to surrender, ix. 17
    makes his entry into Verneuil, ix. 20
    enters Evreux, ix. 27
    marches against Rouen, ix. 53
    enters Rouen, ix. 75, 84
    leaves Rouen, ix. 92
    falls in love with Agnes Sorel, ix. 97
    various places in Normandy are taken by him, ix. 116
    besieges Caen, ix. 123
    makes his entry into that city, ix. 131
    the whole duchy of Normandy is reduced to obedience
    to him, ix. 141, 189
    account of the establishment of his army, ix. 143
    resolves to invade Guienne, ix. 148
    appoints the count de Dunois his lieutenant-general in
    Guienne, ix. 159
    the whole duchy of Guienne, with the exception of Bayonne,
    submits to him, ix. 177
    Bayonne surrenders, ix. 186

  Charles VII. declares war against the duke of Savoy, ix, 198
    sends ambassadors to the duke of Burgundy respecting peace
    in Flanders, ix. 222
    again conquers Bordeaux, ix. 287
    goes to his castle of Lusignan, ix. 297
    joins his army before Bordeaux, ix. 308
    Bordeaux submits to him, ix. 311
    king of France sends an embassy to the king of Spain, ix. 347
    builds two castles at Bordeaux, to keep the inhabitants
    in subjection, _ib._
    seizes the territories of count d'Armagnac, ix. 357
    displeased with his son, takes possession of Dauphiny, ix. 360
    receives an embassy from the king of Hungary at Tours, ix. 392
    recovers from a dangerous illness, takes under his wardship the
    lands of the youth of Rodemac, ix. 418
    summons the duke of Burgundy to attend the trial of the
    duke of Alençon, ix. 438
    forbids the duke to attend, and orders him to send proxies, x. 1
    his sentence on the duke d'Alençon, x. 6.
    summons the twelve peers of his realm to hear the sentence
    passed--transfers the court of justice from Montargis to Vendôme, x. 7
    being informed that it was intended to poison him, falls sick
    and dies, x. 60
    troubles and difficulties at the commencement of his reign--his
    glorious and great feats of arms, x, 67, 69

  Charles VII. solemn funeral services performed for him, x. 99
    his courtesy to the English adherents of Henry VI. x. 367

  Charles, son of Louis XI. born, xi. 100
    married to the countess Margaret of Flanders, xi. 344

  Charles VIII. crowned at Rheims, xi. 359
    his entry into Paris, xi. 361, 363
    his successful war in Brittany, xi. 367
    marries the duchess Anne of Brittany, xi. 371
    generously restores Roussillon to king Ferdinand of Arragon, xi. 372
    concludes a peace with Henry VII. of England, xi. 375
    makes peace with the archduke of Austria, xi. 377
    coronation of his queen, xi. 378
    visits his province of Picardy, xi. 379
    undertakes an expedition to recover the kingdom of Naples, xi. 381
    appoints a regency to govern during his absence, xi. 386
    takes leave of the queen at Grenoble, xi. 392
    crosses the Alps on his march to Naples, _ib._
    makes his public entry into Turin, xi. 394
    goes to Arti, where he is visited by Ludovico Sforza and
    his lady, xi. 399, 401
    makes his entry into the town of Casal, xi. 402
    his reception at Pavia, xi. 405
    his progress from Piacenza to Lucca, xi. 407

  Charles VIII. his reception at Lucca, xi. 410
    visits Pisa, and enters Florence with his whole army, xi. 411
    makes his entry into Sienna, Viterbo, and other towns, xi. 412
    enters Rome as a conqueror with his army, xi. 417
    cures the king's evil by the touch, xi. 420
    what passed on his march from Rome to Naples, xi. 422
    enters Naples in triumph, xii. 1
    attacks and takes the Castel Nuovo and the Castel del Ovo, xii. 3, 7
    makes another entry into Naples as king of that country
    and monarch of all Italy, xii. 15
    begins his return to France, xii, 18
    defeats the confederated princes of Italy at Foronuovo, xii. 24
    decamps from Foronuovo to return to France, xii. 30
    goes to St Denis--dies suddenly at Amboise, xii. 36, 39
    funeral services performed for him, xii. 40

  Charles III. king of Navarre, obtains the duchy of Nemours, i. 108
    surrenders the castle of Cherbourg to the king of France, _ib._

  Charleton, captain, killed at the battle of Verneuil, vi. 93

  Charolois, the count de, is sent by his father against Cambray, iv. 149
    is not permitted to combat the English, iv. 166

  Charolois, buries the dead left on the plains of Azincourt, iv. 196
    takes the oath of allegiance to the queen and his father, iv. 388
    succeeds to the title and possessions of his father, John
    duke of Burgundy, v. 143.
    See Philip duke of Burgundy.

  Charolois, the duke Philip of Burgundy's only son, is promised the
  princess Catherine in marriage, viii. 101
    his marriage with lady Isabella de Bourbon, ix. 351
    his quarrel and reconciliation with his father the duke
    of Burgundy, ix. 388
    the countess brought to bed of a daughter, ix. 390
    attends the coronation of Louis XI. at Rheims, x. 73
    waits on king Louis XI. at Tours, and is magnificently
    entertained, x. 90
    made lieutenant general of Normandy, x. 93
    attends his father, the duke of Burgundy, during his illness, x. 97
    imprisons three men and an apothecary at Brussels, x. 121
    refuses his father's summons to pay his respects to the king, x. 133
    makes heavy complaints against the lord de Croy to the deputies
    of the three estates assembled by his father, x. 141
    answer of the deputies--peace restored between him and his
    father, x. 151, 152
    comes to Lille to wait on his father, x. 163
    the bastard de Reubempré attempts to take him in Holland, x, 169

  Charolois, arrives at Lille and waits on his father, x. 176
    displeasure of the king on his imprisoning the bastard
    de Reubempré, x. 178
    answers the ambassadors from France, x. 183
    sends sir James St Pol, with a company of knights and gentlemen,
    to England to the marriage of king Edward, x. 190
    a copy of his letters explaining why he had dismissed the
    lord de Croy and his friends from his father's service, x. 197, 208
    seizes the castle of Launoy and gives it to James de St Pol, x. 210
    takes leave of the duke of Burgundy and marches his army
    toward France, x. 231
    besieges Beaulieu and crosses the Oise, x. 235
    advances to St Denis, and draws up his army before Paris, x. 237
    defeats the king at Montlehery, x. 252
    his conduct after the victory, x. 253
    joined by the dukes of Berry and Brittany and others of the
    confederation, x. 259
    death of the countess, x. 281
    his treaty with the king at Conflans, x. 290
    takes leave of the king and marches against the Liegeois, x. 298
    enters the country of Liege, grants a truce, x. 308
    returns to his father at Brussels, x. 314
    puts himself on his guard against the king, who makes
    warlike preparations, x. 316
    humbles the Liegeois, and grants them peace, x. 339

  Charolois, orders his troops to meet him at St Quentin, xi. 58

  Charlotte of France, a natural daughter of Charles VII. murdered
  by her husband for adultery with his huntsman, xi. 233, 234

  Charretier, William, bishop of Paris, exhorts the king to choose
  wise counsellors, x. 392

  Chartier, John, bishop of Paris, dies, x. 124

  Chartres, siege of, by the dauphin, v. 272
    the city of, is conquered by Charles the VIIth's party, vii. 70

  Château Gaillard, siege of, v. 112
    is won by the king's men, vi. 300

  Château-Thierry, town of, yields to king Charles, vi. 284

  Château-Vilain, submits to the duke of Burgundy, vii. 168

  Chastel, the lord de, attacks the English fleet near Brest harbour, i. 90
    undertakes an unsuccessful expedition against England,
    and is slain, i. 102

  Châtelet, certain Serjeants of the, punished for ill-treating
  a priest of St Paul's church, xi. 30

  Châtillon, sir James de, negociates a truce with the English
  ambassadors, ii. 283

  Châtillon, the lord de, conquers Château-Thierry, v. 258

  Châtillon, the French besiege, ix. 298

  Chaunoy-sur-Oise castle is destroyed by the inhabitants, vii. 68

  Chavensy, siege of, vii. 331

  Cherbourg, the town and castle of, surrendered to the English, iv. 386
    siege of, by the count de Richemont, ix. 139

  Chimay, the lord de, his bold reply to king Louis XI. respecting
  the duke of Burgundy, x. 116

  Choisy, the castle of, vi. 339

  Cholet, Cassin, flogged for falsely alarming the citizens
  of Paris, x. 399

  Christians, the, war between them and the infidels in Lithuania, ii. 170

  Church, plan for the union of the, i. 175
    a meeting of the university and clergy is held on the
    state of the, ii. 206
    a general council of, held under the emperor Maximilian and
    Louis XII. to the great discontent of the pope, xii. 121

  Cisteaux, order of, v. 29

  Clarence, the duke of, makes a descent on the French at
  la Hogue de St Vos, iii. 78

  Clarence, the duke of, embarks a large army for Harfleur, iv. 246
    besieges Gisors and takes it, v. 108
    is killed at the battle of Baguey in Anjou, v. 263
    banished by king Edward, comes to France with the earl
    of Warwick, xi. 97
    confined in the tower and drowned in a butt of malmsey, xi. 281

  Clark, Thomas, a scotsman, hanged for robbing a fisherman
  of Paris, xi. 181

  Classendach, captain, is killed at the siege of Orleans, vi. 262

  Clement, duke of Bavaria, elected emperor of Germany, i. 45
    is conducted, with a numerous retinue, to Frankfort, i. 46

  Clerc, John du, abbot of St Vaast, in Arras, dies, x. 114

  Clermont, the count de, i. 117

  Clermont, the count de, is sent to carry on a war against
  the English in Gascony, i. 118
    succeeds the duke of Bourbon, ii. 179

  Clermont, the count de, defeats sir Thomas Kiriel in Caen, ix. 112
    is made governor of Bordeaux, ix. 179

  Clermont castle is besieged by the marshal de Boussac, vi. 387
    sir Thomas Kiriel is appointed governor, vii. 66
    it is delivered up to the lord d'Auffremont, vii. 67

  Clery, near Orleans, the church of Nôtre Dame, burnt to the
  ground, xi. 126

  Cleves, the count de, marries Marie, daughter of the duke
  of Burgundy, i. 165
    the princess of, is married to the eldest son of the king
    of Navarre, viii. 97
    duke of, attends the meeting of princes at Mantua, as proxy for
    his uncle the duke of Burgundy, x. 42
    goes to the duke at Brussels, x. 272
    the duchess of, pleads to the duke of Burgundy, for her
    father the count de Nevers, _ib._

  Clifford, lord de, ii. 324

  Clisson, Margaret de, ii. 121

  Clovis, king, ii. 4

  Clugnet, sir, de Brabant, the king's edict against him, iii. 167
    and others, raise an army and despoil the country of the
    Gatinois, iii. 200
    assaults the town of Rethel, ii. 282
    he overruns the country of Burgundy, ii. 283
    treacherously obtains possession of Vervins, iii. 45

  Cofferer's office, iii. 109

  Coeur, Jacques, judgment given against him, ix. 341, 343

  Cohen, the lord de, v. 278

  Coignac, taken by the French, viii. 443

  Coimbra, John of, king of Cyprus, dies, ix. 416

  Coin, debasement of, iii. 121
    the king's edict respecting, iii. 252

  Collet, sir John, killed in battle, ii. 35

  Colombel, sir William, the divorce of, from his wife, xi. 19

  Colonna, the cardinal de, elected pope, iv. 87, 299

  Colonna, Prospero, sent by Leo X. with a force to join the
  emperor Maximilian, xii. 177
    taken prisoner and carried to France, xii. 178

  Combat, terms of, in an Arragonian esquire's challenge, i. 13
    between the seneschal of Hainault and three others, i. 96, 99
    between Bournecte of Hainault, and Solsier of Bunaige,
    of Flanders, i. 125
    between sir W. Batailler and sir John Carmien, ii. 83
    between the seneschal of Hainault and sir John Cornwall, ii. 84
    between three Portuguese and three French, iv. 114
    between Leagnon, bastard d'Arly, and sir John de Blanc, v. 43
    between Poton de Saintrailles and Lionnel de Wardonne, vi. 35
    between Maillotin de Bours and sir Hector de Flavy, at Arras, vii. 6
    between sir John de Mello and the lord de Chargny at Arras, vii. 223

  Comet, a marvellous one in the year 1477, xi. 277

  Commerci, siege of, by Réné, duke of Bar, vii. 187

  Commercy, the heir of, takes the town of Ligny in the Barrois, vii. 94

  Compiègne, the townsmen of, admit the duke of Burgundy, iii. 300
    their reasons for this measure, _ib._
    is besieged by the king's army, iv. 19, 22
    the reduction of, to Henry V. v. 346
    is delivered up to the English, vi. 69
    surrenders to the French, vi. 301
    siege of, by the duke of Burgundy, after the capture of
    Joan d'Arc, vi. 349
    the siege of, raised by the French, vi. 373

  Conches, taken by the French, viii. 442

  Condé, is won by Charles VII. ix. 59

  Cône-sur-Loire, siege of, v. 364

  Conecte, friar Thomas, preaches and inveighs against the
  extravagant dresses of the women, vi. 240
    goes to Rome and is burnt, vii. 98

  Confederates, the Burgundians and Bretons, under the
  count de Charolois, besiege Paris, x. 401
    provisions brought from Paris, on payment being made for them, x. 431

  Conflans, treaty of, between Louis XI. and the confederated
  princes, x. 285
    a royal edict respecting what the king conceded to the count
    de Charolois, x. 290, 297

  Conspiracy, a dreadful one in Paris against the king, iv. 219
    the conspirators seized and beheaded, iv. 221, 222

  Constance, some account of the city of, iv. 75

  Constance, a council is held at, respecting the schism
  in the church, iv. 86
    the earl of Warwick, and others from England, attend
    the council of, iv. 91
    by authority of the council, the sentence against master
    Jean Petit is revoked, iv. 212
    another council is held at, where pope Martin is elected
    head of the church, iv. 299

  Constance, cardinal de, pleads for the king against the
  duke d'Alençon, x. 4

  Constantinople, besieged and captured by Mahomet II ix. 314, 323

  Conti, the lord de, slain at Milan, xii. 122.

  Conversan, Pierre de Luxembourg, count de, captured, v. 212
    is liberated, v. 326

  Convention of Arras is attended by the cardinals of Santa
  Croce and Cyprus, vii. 211
    ambassadors arrive from England to, vii. 215
    ambassadors from France arrive at, vii. 217
    the cardinal of Winchester attends, vii. 232

  Coppin de Mesinacre, is beheaded, viii. 78

  Corbie, the town of, attacked by the French, vii. 12

  Corbeil, siege of, iv. 355

  Courtois, Simon, beheaded for treachery, xi. 305

  Coustain, John, master of the wardrobe to duke Philip of
  Burgundy, his disgraceful death, x. 111, 112

  Courtray, besieged by the Ghent men, ix. 250

  Covetousness, on, i. 209

  Cramailles, Anthony de, is beheaded, vii. 155

  Craon, sir John de, lord of Dommart, taken prisoner at
  the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Craon, sir James de, is taken prisoner at the castle of Dommart, vii. 65

  Craon, the lord de, his victory over the prince of Orange, x. 265

  Crasset, Perrinet, a famous adventurer, vi. 67

  Creil, siege of, vii. 162, 339. viii. 278

  Cordes, the lord des, his successes in Picardy, xi. 373
    falls ill at Lyon and dies, xi. 385

  Corlart de Forges, killed, vii. 155

  Coroam, William de, puts to flight John de Beauvain, vii. 139

  Coucy, the damsel of, her marriage with the count de Nevers, ii. 79
    is taken by prisoners confined therein, and the governor killed, v. 78

  Coulogne-les-Vigneuses, siege of, vii. 167

  Coulomiers en Brie, the town of, taken by scalado, vi. 397

  Coulon, and other adventurers, capture fourscore Flemish vessels
  on the coast of Normandy, xi. 317

  Courtjambe, sir James de, ii. 32

  Crespy, siege of, v. 165
    town of, surrenders to Philip duke of Burgundy, v. 166
    won by the French, by scalado, vii. 130

  Crevant, siege of, vi. 45
    the English and the Burgundians triumph, vi. 50

  Crevecoeur, the lord de, attacks the French, vi. 331
    is sent to the French court to negociate a marriage between
    the count de Charolois and the king's second daughter, viii. 100

  Crichton, sir William, has the guardianship of the young king
  of Scotland after the murder of James I. viii. 5

  Croisade against Bohemia, v. 206
    against the Turks by pope Nicholas V. ix. 289

  Cross, a miraculous white one, appears in the heavens, to turn
  the English to the French, ix. 185

  Crotoy, siege of, vi. 42
    treaty of, vi. 55
    the town and castle of, are surrendered to the duke of Bedford, vi. 71
    is conquered by sir Florimont de Brimeu, viii. 382
    is besieged by the lord d'Auxy and sir Florimont de Brimeu, viii. 49

  Croy, the lord de, made prisoner, ii. 215
    obtains his liberty, iii. 10
    nominated governor of Boulogne, iii. 11
    sends aid secretly to the duke of Burgundy, iii. 313
    is slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Croy, the lord de, opposes the Germans in Luxembourg, ix. 286
    receives a grant from the king of the county and lordship
    of Guisnes, x. 127
    labours to make peace with the count de Charolois, x. 277

  Croy, sir John de, is arrested by orders of the queen of France, iii. 285
    escapes, iii. 314
    attacks the English, and is discomfited, vii. 349, 352
    besieges Guines, vii. 365

  Croy, sir John de, breaks up the siege to aid the duke
  before Calais, vii. 378
    attacks certain pillagers in the town of Haussy, viii. 272

  Cyprus, brother to the king of, comes to Paris, iv. 225
    the king of, is made prisoner by the Saracens, vi. 187
    the king is taken to Cairo, vi. 192
    the king is liberated, vi. 195
    the king of, dies, vii. 82
    the cardinals of, attend the convention at Arras, vii. 211


  D.

  D'ailly, Peter, bishop of Cambray, iii. 327

  D'airaines, siege of, v. 328

  Dammartin, the lord de, condemned for high treason, but banished
  to Rhodes, x. 130, 131
    escapes from the bastile into Brittany, x. 210
    makes an exchange with king Louis XI. of his castle of
    Blancattort for certain rights, xi. 15
    appointed grand master of the royal household, xi. 31

  Dampierre, lord de, i. 130
    slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Daniel, a servant to Olivier le Daim, horrid accusations
  against, xi. 282, 287
    hanged on the gibbet at Paris, xi. 429

  Darius, king, i. 348

  D'Armagnac, the count, his body is taken up and decently
  interred, viii. 46

  D'Auffremont, the lord de, is made prisoner by La Hire, vii. 177

  Daulphin, sir Guichart, appointed grand master of the king's
  household, ii. 135
    slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185
    and others, sent out of Paris, iii. 243

  D'Auxy, the lord, and sir Florimont de Brimeu, march to lay
  siege to Crotoy, viii. 49

  Dauphinois, the, continue the war against the Burgundians, v. 33
    take the town of Laigny-sur-Marne, v. 45
    take the city of Soissons, v. 51
    the dauphiness is sent to the dauphin, v. 52
    the dauphin carries on a vigorous war against the Burgundians, v. 83
    retake Villeneuve-le-Roi, v. 258
    defeat the duke of Clarence near Baugy, v. 262
    advance to Alençon, v. 265
    take Avranches, v. 319
    assemble to raise the siege of D'Airaines, v. 329
    the dauphin's lady, called the queen, is brought to bed of a son,
    who is christened Louis, dauphin of Vienne, vi. 65.
    See Charles the dauphin, and Charles VII.

  Dauphiny, the Burgundians are defeated in, vi. 370

  Davencourt, the town and castle of, taken by the foreign companies
  in the service of the duke of Burgundy, iv. 287

  David de Combrebant is put to death, with his brother the young
  earl of Douglas, viii. 6

  Dax, the city of, is regained from the French, viii. 342
    is besieged by the count d'Albreth, ix. 164
    submits to the king, ix. 169

  Denis, sir, de Sainct-Fleur, is beheaded, vii. 111

  Denisot de Chaumont, a butcher of Paris, his quarrel with the
  bastard of Bourbon, iii. 94

  DESREY, PIERRE, beginning of his chronicles of Charles VIII. xi. 356

  D'Estampes, the count, reconquers the town of St Valery, vii. 164
    recovers the castle of Roullet from the men of the lord
    de Moy, viii. 109
    marches an army into the duchy of Luxembourg, viii. 359
    succeeds to the duchy of Brittany, x. 12
    makes prisoner the viscount d'Amiens, x. 42
    quits the house of Burgundy and attaches himself to the king
    of France, x. 129

  Devils, on what conditions they will assist wicked men, i. 280
    an assemblage of, to destroy the king of France, i. 289

  Devices of the Orleans men and the Burgundians, i. 153

  Deymer, Jean, condemned and quartered for treason against
  the lord of Beaujeu, xi. 145

  Dieppe, the town of, escaladed by the French, vii. 301

  Digne, the bishop of, preaches before the council of Pisa, ii. 98

  Dijon, the king's palace at, burnt down, xii. 80

  Dinant, the inhabitants of the town of, insult the count
  de Charolois, x. 274

  Dinant besieged and battered with cannon, x. 322
    forced to surrender, plundered and demolished, x. 399

  D'Ollehaing, the lord de, is reinstated in his office of
  chancellor, iii. 153

  Domfront, siege of, iii. 29

  Dommart, fortress of, taken by the French, by scalado, vi. 24

  Dommart castle taken by the French, vii. 64

  Dommart, the lord de, is made prisoner by the French, _ib._

  D'Orris, Michel, challenges the knights of England to combat, i. 13
    his challenge answered by sir J. Prendergast, i. 15
    his answers to sir J. Prendergast's letters, apologizing for not
    fulfilling his engagement, i. 22
    conclusion of his second letter, i. 25
    his second general challenge, i. 31
    fourth letter, addressed to the knights of England, i. 32

  Douay, heretics of, v. 237

  Douglas, the earl of, defeats the lord Percy, and sir Thomas
  de Hauton, ix. 12
    is killed at the battle of Verneuil, vi. 94

  Dours, attacked by the English, viii. 257

  Doyac, John, intercepts the duke of Brittany's armour from
  Milan, xi. 388
    has his ears cut off, and his tongue bored with a hot iron, xi. 360

  Dorset, the earl of, governor of Harfleur, invades the country
  of the Caux, iv. 260

  Dreaux, siege of, v. 303

  Dress, changes of, in France, A.D. 1467, x. 340

  Dudley, captain, killed at the battle of Verneuil, vi. 93

  Dun-le-Roi, siege of, iii. 53

  Dunois, the count de, takes the city of Leiseux, ix. 16
    takes possession of Mantes, ix. 17
    replies to the speech of master Guillaume, ix. 24
    gains the castle of Harcourt, ix. 35
    takes Argentan, ix. 47
    is ordered by the king to join him against Rouen, ix. 52
    enters Rouen, ix. 66
    is appointed lieutenant-general in Guienne, ix. 159
    besieges Monte Guyon, _ib._
    enters Bordeaux, ix. 171
    besieges Bayonne, ix. 179

  Dunot is charged with an attempt to poison the duke of Orleans,
  and drowned, viii. 271


  E.

  Earthquake, dreadful, at Naples and in Calabria, ix. 366, 367

  Eckeloo, the town of, is burnt by the marshal of Burgundy, ix. 243

  Edelin, master Guillaume, reprimanded and imprisoned for having
  bound himself in servitude to Satan, ix. 345, 346

  Edward, duke of Bar, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Edward, earl of Marche, eldest son to the duke of York, defeats
  queen Margaret of England, x. 53, 55
    crowned king of England, x. 57

  Edward, earl of Marche, gains the battle of Hexham, x. 163
    marries the daughter of lord Rivers, x. 189
    banishes the earl of Warwick and the duke of Clarence, xi. 97
    defeated by the earl of Warwick, flies to Burgundy, xi. 105
    returns with a great army and regains the kingdom, xi. 112
    summons the king of France to restore the duchies of Guienne
    and Normandy, xi. 174
    meets the king of France at Pecquigny--their conference, xi. 195
    causes his brother the duke of Clarence to be drowned in a
    butt of malmsey, xi. 281
    dies, xi. 349

  Egypt, the sultan of, determines to conquer the whole kingdom
  of Cyprus, vi. 159

  Eichtfeld, battle of, between the duke of Burgundy, the duke
  of Holland, and the Liegeois, ii. 28

  Elephants, war, i. 107

  Encre, church and town of, almost entirely destroyed by fire, x. 89

  Engennes, sir John de, beheaded by order of the king of England, iv. 380

  England, custom in, of placing a crown beside the bed of their
  dying monarchs, iii.
    a truce between France and, iii. 20
    ambassadors arrive at Paris from, iv. 99
    assembles an army to invade France, iv. 126

  England, a meeting is held between Calais and Gravelines to
  negotiate respecting a peace with, viii. 112, 179
    troubles in, between the dukes of York and Somerset, ix. 190
    civil war in, ix. 348, 359
    ambassadors from, denied access to the king of France, x. 41
    slight mention of the rebellion and discord in, x. 48
    battle of Towton, queen Margaret defeated by Edward
    earl of Marche, x. 53, 55
    the earl of Warwick drives the French from the places
    they had won, x. 120
    an embassy sent to king Louis XI. x. 133
    battle of Hexham, x. 162
    a truce concluded with France for twenty-two months, xi. 22
    Henry VI. delivered from the tower by the earl of Warwick, xi. 105
    return of Edward IV. from Burgundy, who regains the kingdom, xi. 114
    conference between king Edward and king Louis XI. at Pecquigny, xi. 195
    the duke of Clarence drowned in a butt of malmsey, xi. 281
    a peace concluded with Scotland, xi. 342
    succession of Henry VII. noticed, xi. 368
    Henry VIII. prepares to invade France, xii. 145
    battle of Spurs, xii. 153

  English, the, marching to reinforce the siege of Orleans, are met
  and attacked by the French, vi. 249

  English, the, make many conquests, vi. 321
    conquer the bulwark of Lagny sur-Maine, vii. 78
    defeat La Hire at Le Bois, vii. 307
    make excursions towards Boulogne and Gravelines, vii. 342
    make an excursion into the country of Santois, viii. 181
    make an inroad on the Boulonois from Calais, x. 10

  Englemonstier, burnt by the Ghent men, ix. 253

  Enguerrand de Bournouville, attacks the Armagnacs near Paris, ii. 322
    attacks them near Bourges, iii. 66
    is beheaded, iv. 32

  Erpingham, sir Thomas, i. 188
    his gallant conduct at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 171

  Esparre, lord de l', arrested for treason, and pardoned, ix. 5
    again offends, and is executed, _ib._

  Espineuse, sir Binet d', executed, ii. 310
    his body is taken from the gibbet and interred, iii. 96

  Essars, Anthony des, complaints against him, iii. 108
    enters the bastile with his brother, iii. 145

  Essars, sir Peter des, provost of Paris, arrests the ministers
  of finance, ii. 129
    is deprived of all his offices, ii. 203
    is reinstated in his office of provost, ii. 297
    flies for refuge, iii. 131
    is arrested and imprisoned, iii. 145
    is beheaded, iii. 178

  Esternay, lord d', general of Normandy, flies from Rouen
  in disguise, xi. 9
    taken and drowned, xi. 11

  Estienette de Besançon, the wife of a rich merchant,
  seduced by the count de Foix, xi. 81

  Estouteville, sir Robert d', restored to the provostship of Paris, xi. 3
    his gallant defence of Beauvais, xi. 133
    dies, xi. 311

  Estrepagny, the castle of, is taken by storm, vi. 300, 301

  Eu, the count d', arms in defence of the duke of Acquitaine, iii. 176
    is taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194
    is liberated and returns to France, viii. 103
    king Louis XI.'s lieutenant, negociates with the
    rebellious princes, xi. 402
    dies, xi. 117

  Eu, reconquered by the French from the count de Roussi, xi. 141

  Eugenius IV. pope, is solicited by the emperor of Germany to continue
  the general council at Basil, vii. 22
    sends the cardinal of Santa Croce to France to promote peace, vii. 76
    the Romans quarrel with him, vii. 158
    escapes to Florence, _ib._
    a quarrel arises between him and the council of Basil, viii. 99
    sends bulls to divers parts of Europe against heresy and the
    council of Basil, viii. 117
    dies, viii. 414

  Eustache, friar, harangues the king, iii. 154

  Eustache, sir de Leactre, succeeds sir Reginald de Corbie as
  chancellor of France, iii. 175

  Everard de la Marche, destroys the town and castle of
  Orchimont, vii. 340

  Evereaux submits to the king, ix. 27

  Exeter, duke of, iv. 160


  F.

  Falaise, siege of, ix. 133

  Famechon, sir Peter de, beheaded, ii. 352

  Famine, a great one in France, viii. 65
    rages in many places, viii. 94
    another great one, throughout France, in 1481, xi. 331

  Fascot, sir John, is appointed to the command of the convoy
  of reinforcements to the siege of Orleans, vi. 249

  Fassincault, capt. comes to Genoa to assist Boucicaut, ii. 125

  Fastolfe, sir John, commands the armament to reinforce the
  siege of Orleans, vi. 249
    is deprived of the order of the garter, vi. 275

  Fauquenberghe, the count de, slain at the battle of
  Azincourt, iv. 186

  Feast of the Golden Fleece, viii. 255

  Fécamp, city of, is taken by the marshal de Rieux, vii. 304
    is recovered by the English, viii. 33

  Felix V. pope, relinquishes all claims to the papacy, ix. 425

  Ferdinand, king of Arragon, dies, xii. 196

  Ferry de Hengest, bailiff of Amiens, ii. 276

  Ferry de Mailly, taken prisoner by the duke of Burgundy, iv. 211

  Ferry de Mailly obtains his liberty, iv. 212
    invades the towns of Quesnel and Hangest, iv. 229

  Finances of France, public report respecting, iii. 100

  Flanders, the three estates of, are anxious for peace, ix. 258

  Flanders, the countess of, dies, xi. 333

  Flavy, William de, murdered while shaving, by his wife, x. 164

  Flemings, the, their unruly behaviour in the Burgundian
  army, ii. 289, 293
    demand permission to return home, ii. 299
    forcibly retreat, and commit many excesses, ii. 302
    receive letters from Henry of England, iii. 42
    resolve not to break their truce with the Burgundians, iii. 44
    march to the siege of Calais, vii. 352
    their great presumption, vii. 358
    resolve to leave the duke before Calais, vii. 375
    retreat in disgrace, vii. 381
    again take up arms after their retreat from Calais, vii. 388
    send money to Douay, which is seized by the king's troops, xi. 396
    are admitted into Cambray, xi. 310
    make peace with the king, xi. 342

  Flisque, de, cardinal, offer of pardon to, ii. 114

  Flocquet, one of the king's commanders, dies, x. 95

  Florence, conspiracy of the Pazzi at, xi. 272
    entry of Charles VIII. into, xi. 412

  Florentines, pay their duty to pope John XXIII. ii. 168

  Florimont, sir, de Brimeu, conquers Crotoy, vii. 382

  Foix, the count of, gains the town and castle of Mauléon, ix. 42
    besieges Guischen castle, ix. 101
    falls in love with the wife of a rich merchant of Paris
    and seduces her, xi. 81

  Folleville castle is taken by the English, viii. 181

  Fontaines-Lavagam, siege of, v. 160

  Fontenoy, the castle of, besieged, iii. 53

  Forbier, Louis, lieutenant-governor of Pontoise, admits the
  Burgundians into the town, x. 422

  Foronuovo, the battle of, xii. 24

  Fosse, the town of, is burnt by the lord de Croy, vi. 356

  Fougares is taken by sir Francis de Surienne, viii. 427
    surrenders to the duke of Brittany, ix. 88

  Fradin, Anthony, a cordelier friar, preaches at Paris,
  and is afterwards banished, xi. 291

  France, the marshal of, goes to England to the assistance
  of the prince of Wales, i. 103
    the duke of Burgundy's petition relative to the internal
    state of, i. 141
    the clergy of, summoned to meet the king on the subject of
    church union, i. 176
    the prelates and clergy of, summoned to Paris, i. 325
    a reformation in the finances of, resolved on, ii. 146
    a tax is laid on the clergy of, by pope John, ii. 234
    a civil war breaks out in several parts of, ii. 278

  France, report respecting the abuses in the government of, iii. 98
    the ringleaders of the rioters are banished from, iii. 242
    propositions for restoring peace to the kingdom, iii. 196
    a heavy tax is laid on the kingdom, with the consequences
    of it, iv. 218
    the queen of, is banished, iv. 279
    the queen of, escapes from Tours, and follows the duke
    of Burgundy, iv. 360
    the queen writes several letters on behalf of the duke
    of Burgundy, iv. 362
    depreciation of the coin of, v. 259, 306
    a rigorous tax is imposed for a new coinage, v. 313
    poetical complainings of the commonalty and labourers of, v. 352
    a great pestilence and depravity in, vii. 139
    the poor people of, are very much distressed, vii. 392
    a great famine in, viii. 65

  Francis, count of Angoulême, betrothed to the princess Claude
  of France, xii. 104
    sent to command against the Swiss, xii. 149
    succeeds Louis XI. on the throne of France, xii. 171
    concludes a treaty with the archduke, xii. 172
    makes his public entry into various cities, xii. 175
    marches into Italy, xii. 176
    pursues the Swiss with his whole army, xii. 179

  Francis, defeats their army at Marignano, xii. 181
    subdues Milan and reduces the castle, xii. 191
    holds a conference with Leo X. at Bologna, and returns to
    France, xii. 195
    concludes a treaty of peace with the archduke king of Spain, xii. 205
    received at Paris with demonstrations of joy, xii. 206

  Frederick, duke of Austria, is crowned emperor, and married at
  Rome to the daughter of the king of Portugal, ix. 190

  Frederic, styling himself king of Naples, comes to France, xii. 15
    dies, xii. 102

  French, offer battle to the Burgundians, after their defeat at
  Compiègne, which is refused, vi. 393
    are nearly taking the castle of Rouen, vii. 59
    commit great disorders in the Amiennois, &c. vii. 92
    some captains cross the Somme, and overrun Artois, vii. 101
    won the town of St Valery, vii. 114
    overrun and pillage the country of the duke of Burgundy after
    the peace or Arras, vii. 300

  Fresnoy surrenders to the duke d'Alençon, ix. 49

  Fronsac, siege of, by the count de Dunois, ix. 166

  Frost, a very long and severe one, at Paris, i. 204


  G.

  Galilee, the prince of, vi. 185

  Gaieta, siege of, vii. 237
    taken by the French troops under Charles VIII. xii. 10

  Gaillon castle submits to Charles VII. ix. 88

  Gamaches, the lord de, appointed bailiff of Rouen, iv. 285

  Gargrave, sir Thomas, is killed at the siege of Orleans, vi. 236

  Garnier, Laurence, the body of, taken from the gibbet and buried, xi. 306

  Gascony, campaign in, i. 118

  Gastellin, sir, seizes the castle of Oisy, iv. 232

  Gouy, Daviod de, v. 83

  Gaveren, siege of, ix. 265
    battle of, ix. 270

  Generals, officers of finance so called, iii. 110

  Geneva, the count of, marries the daughter of the king
  of Cyprus, vii. 148

  Genevieve, St. the steeple of the church of, burnt by lightning, xi. 351

  Genoa, the sovereignty of, is offered to Charles VII. viii. 408
    a marvellous event at, xi. 400

  Gerberoy, the town of, is taken by the French, viii. 442

  Geoffroy, sir, de Villars, made prisoner by the duke of Burgundy, iv. 347

  Gergeau, siege of, vi. 234
    the town and castle are won by the French, vi. 266

  Germans, are opposed in Luxembourg by the lord de Croy, ix. 286

  Gersies, the castle of, won by sir Simon de Clermont, iii. 48

  Gery, St., the canons of the chapter of, quarrel with the inhabitants
  of the town of Cambray, iv. 147

  Ghent-men rise against their, magistrates, vii. 89
    again rebel, vii. 131

  Ghent-men, and other Flemings, make great preparations for
  the siege of Calais, vii. 344
    resolve to leave the duke's army before Calais, vii. 273
    rise in arms and commit great depredations, viii. 9
    excited by the artisans, they again take up arms, viii. 66
    murmur respecting the tax on salt, ix. 193
    supplicate pardon from the duke of Burgundy, ix. 194
    they besiege Oudenarde, ix. 202
    they are defeated by the count d'Estampes, ix. 205
    they fortify Nieneve, ix. 215
    they are defeated there, ix. 216
    the duke defeats them at the battle of Rupelmonde, ix. 218
    they choose for their leader a lusty cutler, ix. 224
    they are defeated at Hulet and Moerbeke, _ib._
    refuse the articles of peace from France, ix. 230
    recommence war, ix. 234
    are defeated before Alost, ix. 244
    various encounters between them and the Picards, ix. 247
    attempt to burn various parts of Hainault, _ib._
    send a deputation to the count d'Estampes respecting peace, ix. 249
    are defeated before Alost by sir Francis, the Arragonian, ix. 244
    Alost is nearly taken by them, ix. 256
    they besiege Courtray, ix. 250

  Ghent-men, they are near taking the duchess of Burgundy prisoner, ix. 251
    send a deputation to beg the mercy of the duke of Burgundy, ix. 275
    treaty of peace between them and the duke of Burgundy, ix. 280
    humble themselves before the duke, ix. 284

  Ghent, order of the duke of Burgundy's entrance into, ix. 429
    magnificent entertainments at, ix. 428, 436

  Giac, the lady of, v. 118

  Gilbert du Fretun, makes war against king Henry, i. 90

  Giles, the lord, of Brittany, is put to death by his brother,
  the duke, viii. 408

  Gilles de Plessis, beheaded, iv. 33

  Gilles de Postelles, is accused of treason to the duke of Burgundy,
  and beheaded, vii. 129

  Girard, sir, lord of Herancourt, i. 47

  Gisors, the siege of, v. 108

  Glocester, the duke of, is sent to St Omer as hostage for
  the duke of Burgundy, iv. 247

  Glocester, Humphrey, duke of, and his duchess, leave Calais for
  Hainault to receive the allegiance of that country, vi. 113
    the duke of, sends a letter to the duke of Burgundy, vi. 117
    copy of his second letter to the duke of Burgundy, vi. 128
    is blamed by the court of London for his expedition into
    Hainault, vi. 159
    quarrels with the cardinal of Winchester, vi. 170
    resolves to succour the duchess in Holland, vi. 180

  Glocester, Humphrey, duke of, his marriage with the duchess
  Jacqueline declared null and void by the pope, vi. 197
    marries Eleanor Cobham, _ib._

  Glocester, the bishop of, is murdered by the populace in
  London, viii. 431

  Godfrey, cardinal of Arras, waits on king Louis XI. x. 139

  Golden Fleece, order of, vi. 329

  Gouge, Martin, bishop of Chartres, arrested, ii. 129

  Gournay, surrendered to the duke of Burgundy, vi. 360

  Grand master of the Teutonic order, marches an army into
  Lithuania, ii. 170

  Grand-prè, the count de, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 186
    murdered by Parisians, v. 21

  Granson, the duke of Burgundy defeated by the Swiss at, xi. 277

  Graussy, siege of, vii. 110

  Gregory XIII. pope, attempts an union in the church, i. 117
    sends ambassadors and bulls to the university of Paris, i. 183
    is condemned at the council of Pisa, ii. 90, 109, 118

  Grey, sir Thomas, iv. 141

  Gueldres, the duke of, mortally wounded before Tournay, xi. 265

  Gueroult, Pierre de, a youth, beheaded for disloyalty, x. 397

  Guetron castle, siege of, vii. 53
    the soldiers who garrisoned it are nearly all hanged, vii. 54

  Guerbigny, the Burgundians and the English are defeated near, vi. 390

  Guienne is invaded by the French, ix. 159
    the greater part of the towns and castles in the duchy surrender to
    the French, ix. 166
    the war in, xii. 143

  Guiffert, Andrieu, and other public treasurers, complaints
  concerning, iii. 106
    is arrested, iii. 131

  Guillemins, order of hermits, i. 176

  Guischen castle, siege of, ix. 101

  Guise, siege of, vi. 79
    the garrison capitulate to sir John de Luxembourg and sir Thomas
    Rampstoun, vi. 98

  Guye de Roye appeals from the constitutions drawn up by the university
  of Paris respecting the schisms, ii. 16
    his commissary committed to close confinement, ii. 17
    is murdered during a riot at Voltri, ii. 87


  H.

  Hainault, duke William, count of, negociates a reconciliation between
  the duke of Burgundy and the king of France, ii. 65
    the seneschal of, and sir John Cornwall combat before
    Charles IV. ii. 84
    the seneschal of, performs a deed of arms, with three others,
    in the presence of Martin, king of Arragon, i. 95
    the countess of, endeavours to make peace between the king, the
    duke of Acquitaine, and the duke of Burgundy, iv. 36
    renews her negociations for peace, iv. 39

  Hainault, the countess of, negociates a peace, iv. 58
    a second time negociates a peace, iv. 98

  Hallam, Robert, bishop of Salisbury, attends the council of
  Pisa, ii. 98

  Ham, siege of, ii. 291
    evacuated, ii. 293

  Hambre, the lord de, unsuccessfully attempts the rescue of the
  count de la Marche, iii. 6

  Hamela in Westphalia, strange miracles of a rat-catcher at, xi. 122

  Hamme-sur-Somme, is taken by scalado, vi. 64

  Hamme, town of, is won by the French, vii. 166

  Hangest, John de, lord de Huqueville, goes to England to the assistance
  of the prince of Wales, i. 102

  Hangest, the lord de, is made prisoner, ii. 247

  Hangestez, the lord de, taken prisoner at Mercq castle, i. 130

  Hannequin Lyon, a noted pirate, vii. 347

  Hanton, sir Thomas de, invades Scotland, ix. 12

  Haphincourt castle, reconquered by sir John de Luxembourg, vii. 140

  Harcourt, sir James de, taken prisoner at the battle of
  Azincourt, iv. 194
    espouses the heiress of the count de Tancarville, iv. 381
    captures his cousin the count de Harcourt, v. 5
    makes a successful excursion near Rouen, v. 64
    continues the war against France, v. 240
    begins a war on the vassals and countries of the duke of
    Burgundy, v. 268

  Harcourt, sir James de, meets a party of English and is defeated, v. 313
    visits the lord de Partenay, and requires him to give up his
    castle, vi. 61
    attempting to seize that lord is put to death, vi. 62

  Harcourt, sir John, has the bishopric of Narbonne given to him by
  the pope, vii. 119

  Harcourt castle is taken by the count de Dunois, ix. 35

  Hardy, John, undertakes to poison Louis XI., ix. 157
    is betrayed and apprehended, xi. 158.
    condemned and executed, xi. 159, 160

  Harfleur, siege of, by the English, iv. 142
    the king of England enters, iv. 158
    sir John le Blond made governor, iv. 160
    the French navy at, is destroyed, iv. 248
    surrenders to the king of France, vii. 301
    is besieged by the earl of Somerset, viii. 200
    surrenders to the king, ix. 94

  Harlebeck, the village of, is burnt by the Ghent men, ix. 238

  Harlem is blockaded by the duchess Jacqueline, vi. 175

  Haussy. See Pillagers.

  Hautbourdin, the lord de, bastard of St Pol, dies, x. 321

  Haverford, town and castle of, burnt by the French, i. 103

  Hector, sir, bastard of Bourbon, iv. 23
    is killed, iv. 32

  Hector de Flavy, sir, combats Maillotin, at Arras, vii. 6

  Hêdin, the town of, surrenders to the king of France, xi. 258

  Henry, king of Denmark, Sweden, and Norway, marries the daughter
  of Henry, king of England, ii. 78

  Henry IV. of Lancaster, king of England, combats the Percies
  and Welshmen, i. 47
    his courageous conduct, i. 48
    is challenged by the duke of Orleans, i. 55
    his answer to the duke of Orleans' challenge, i. 58
    king of England, thinks it beneath his dignity to fight with
    one of inferior rank, i. 59, 60
    is reproached for his conduct to the queen of England, the niece
    of the duke of Orleans, i. 71
    answers the charge, i. 78
    his reply to the duke of Orleans' second letter, i. 73
    reinforces his army in France, i. 133
    prohibits his subjects from interfering in the factions of
    France, iii. 27
    agrees to aid the Armagnacs, iii. 39
    sends letters into Ghent and other towns, iii. 42
    confesses he had no right to the crown, iii. 139
    dies, _ib._
    of the alliance between him and the princes of France, iii. 141

  Henry V. king of England, assembles a large army to invade
  France, iv. 126
    ambassadors sent to him, iv. 128

  Henry V. makes great preparations to invade France, iv. 136
    he sends letters to the king of France, at Paris, iv. 137
    discovers, while at Southampton, a conspiracy of his nobles
    against him, iv. 140
    lays siege to Harfleur, iv. 142
    enters Harfleur, iv. 152
    resolves to march to Calais, iv. 159
    his victory at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 183
    embarks at Calais for England after the battle of Azincourt, iv. 199
    a truce is concluded between him and the duke of Burgundy, iv. 228
    returns to France with a large army, and takes many towns and
    fortresses, iv. 297
    his conquests in Normandy, iv. 378, v. 5
    conquers Pont de l'Arche, v. 29
    besieges Rouen, v. 40
    makes his public entry into Rouen, v. 71
    sends an embassy to the king of France and the duke of Burgundy
    at Provins, v. 80
    is dissatisfied with the peace between the dauphin and the duke
    of Burgundy, v. 239
    captures the town of Pontoise, v. 106
    orders the fortresses of Château-Gaillard and of La Roche-Guyon
    to be besieged, v. 112
    arrives, with his whole army, at Troyes in Champagne, to celebrate
    his marriage, and to conclude a peace with the king of France, v. 183

  Henry V. treaty of peace between him and Charles VI. after the
  marriage of his daughter Catherine, v. 185
    leaves Troyes with Charles VI. v. 198
    inhumanly hangs the prisoners at the siege of Montereau, v. 203
    several castles and forts are delivered up to him, in which he
    places his own captains, v. 214
    is declared heir and regent of the realm of France, v. 216
    goes to Paris with his queen, and Charles VI. and his queen, in
    great pomp after the surrender of Melun, v. 232
    keeps open court at Paris in a very magnificent manner, v. 242
    returns to England with his queen, v. 244
    returns to France with a powerful army to combat the dauphin, v. 269
    marches from Calais to Beauvais and Montes, where he is met by
    the duke of Burgundy, v. 272
    conquers Dreux, and pursues the dauphin, v. 303
    besieges Meaux, v. 306, 333
    many other towns and forts surrender to him, v. 340
    goes from Paris to Senlis, v. 346
    goes from Senlis to Compiègne, v. 350
    is taken sick during his march to the aid of the duke of Burgundy,
    to the relief of Cône-sur-Loire, v. 367
    addresses the duke of Bedford, &c. whilst on his death bed, v. 368
    dies, v. 371

  Henry V. his body is conveyed in great pomp to England, v. 375
    a noble knight of Picardy uses a joking expression relative to
    his boots, which was often repeated, v. 378

  Henry VI. comes from Pontoise to St Denis to be crowned king
  of France, vii. 44
    is crowned at Paris by the cardinal of Winchester, vii. 49
    goes to Rouen, vii. 51
    is much hurt at the manner in which the duke of Burgundy
    addressed him after the peace of Arras, vii. 291
    sends an embassy to the emperor of Germany, and the ambassadors
    are arrested at Brabant, vii. 308
    sends letters to the Hollanders, vii. 310
    sends letters to France explaining and excusing his quarrel with
    the duke of Burgundy, vii. 316
    is betrothed to the daughter of Réné king of Sicily, viii. 394
    taken prisoner by king Edward IV. and sent to the tower, x. 278
    delivered by the earl of Warwick, xi. 105

  Henry VII. of England sends a large force to the assistance of
  the Bretons, xi. 368
    lands a force at Calais and besieges Boulogne, xi. 373
    concludes a peace, xi. 374

  Henry VIII. of England prepares to invade France, xii. 144
    disembarks with his whole army at Calais, xii. 147
    besieges Therouenne, xii. 151

  Henry VIII. returns to England, after taking Therouenne and
  Tournay, xii. 157
    his sister the princess Mary married to Louis XII. xii. 163

  Heretic, an extraordinary, at Paris, xii. 84

  Heresy, may be punished on the dead body of the heretics, i. 235

  Hericourt, siege of, v. 325

  Hermit, a devout one in Swisserland, subsists for fifteen years on
  the holy wafer, xi. 276

  Hemon, sir, de Bouberch, a vessel of his is taken by sir James
  de Harcourt, v. 267

  Hermontfort, the town of, is attacked by the duke of Burgundy, vi. 211

  Herrings, battle of, vi. 253

  Heuse, the brogne de la, is dismissed from the provostship, iii. 243

  Hoguemans, ix. 193, 209

  Holland, William, duke of. See Liegeois, and John duke of Burgundy.

  Holland, inundation in, caused by the breaking of the dykes, xi. 84

  Holy Land, ambassadors from, to the court of France, x. 65
    from thence to the court of Burgundy, x. 66

  Homicide, i. 266

  Honfleur, siege of, ix. 103

  Honoré Cokin, heads an insurrection at Amiens, vii. 295
    is beheaded, vii. 299

  Howard, the lord, and other ambassadors from England wait on the
  king of France, xi. 318

  Howard, sir Edward, killed in a sea-engagement, xii. 159

  Howel, John, surrenders the castle of La Roche-Guyon to its lord,
  and turns to the French, ix. 32

  Hulst, the men of Ghent are defeated at, ix. 225

  Humieres, the lord de, is taken by the French, vii. 91

  Humieres, the lord de, taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Humieres, the bastard de, defeats the French near Rethel, vii. 214

  Humphry, duke of Glocester, sends a challenge and a threat to the duke
  of Burgundy before Calais, vii. 367
    arrives at Calais with a large armament, vii. 385
    enters Flanders, vii. 386

  Hungary, the king of, writes for advice relative to the schism,
  to the university of Paris, i. 324
    his embassy to the king of France, ix. 392
    dies, ix. 394, 416
    marries Anne of Candale of the house of Foix, xii. 79
    death of the queen, xii. 105

  Huntingdon, the earl of, aids the duke of Burgundy before
  Compiègne, vi. 357

  Hure, John de la, and others taken prisoners by a band of
  horsemen, x. 381

  Huy, many of the inhabitants of, beheaded and drowned, ii. 41


  I.

  Innocent VIII. pope, succeeds Sixtus IV. x. 366
    dies, xi. 381

  Isabella, queen of England, returns to France, i. 40
    is married to Charles d'Orleans, i. 162

  Isabella, queen of England, dies in childbed, ii. 22

  Isabella, queen of France, and wife of Charles VI. is banished, iv. 279
    escapes from Tours with the duke of Burgundy, iv 259
    writes letters on the duke's behalf, iv. 362
    is carried to Paris, v. 24
    joins the duke of Burgundy, v. 87
    dies in the city of Paris, vii. 285

  Isabella of Savoy, queen of France, comes to the king at Senlis, x. 129

  Isabella, queen of Spain, dies, xii. 102

  Ishmael, the Sophi, his furious battle with the Turks, xii. 196

  Ivry castle besieged, vi. 63, 86
    surrenders to the English, vi. 86


  J.

  Jacob van Ardoyen, a blacksmith, is hung for lending hammers to
  the duke of Burgundy during the insurrection at Bruges, viii. 21

  Jacobins, the, renounce their claims to tythes, &c. ii. 152

  Jacotin de Bethune is sent to prison, but soon afterwards
  released, viii. 173

  Jacquelina of Bavaria married to John duke of Touraine, i. 162
    dies, vii. 398

  Jacqueline, the duchess, writes to the duke of Glocester respecting
  her being put under the wardship of the duke of Burgundy, vi. 148, 154
    escapes in disguise from Ghent and goes to Holland, vi. 166

  Jacqueline, the duchess, is divorced from the duke by the pope, vi. 196
    treaty between her and the duke of Burgundy, which ends the
    war in Holland, vi. 227

  Jacques Coeur is arrested and made the king's prisoner, ix. 196

  Jacqueville, sir Elion de, heads a party of the Parisians to arrest
  sir Peter des Essars, iii. 145
    kills sir James de la Rivierre in prison, iii. 174, 214
    is dragged out of the church of our Lady at Chartres by Hector de
    Saveuses and put to death, iv. 369

  Jagellon, king of Poland, is baptized, ii, 154

  James de la Marche, king of Naples, the Neapolitans make war
  on him, iv. 257

  James I. king of Scotland, is murdered in his bedchamber, viii. 2

  James de Helly is killed at Compiègne, vi. 391

  Jane of France, duchess of Bourbon, dies, xi. 322

  Januarius, St, of Naples, the miraculous head and blood of, xii. 13

  Jean de Chevrot has the bishopric of Tournay conferred upon
  him, vii. 120

  Jeanne de Bethune, countess of Ligny, does homage for her lands
  to Charles VII. viii. 270

  Jeanbon, a native of Wales, is beheaded for a conspiracy to poison
  the dauphin, xi. 243

  Jeannet de Poix, and others, by command of the duke of Burgundy,
  march secretly to St Dennis, and make inroads on different parts
  of France, iv. 228

  Jeusne, master Robert le, is sent by the count de St Pol to harangue
  the king of France, iii. 231
    is arrested for the want of vouchers, iii. 232

  Jeune, Robert le, governor of Arras, death and character of, x. 122

  Jews, insulted at the coronation of pope John XXIII. ii. 164
    crucify a child at Trent, in ridicule of the mysteries of
    the passion, xi. 274

  Joab, why king David ordered him to be slain, i. 253

  Joan, the maid of Orleans, waits on king Charles at Chinon, vi. 256
    she is retained in the king's service, _ib._
    goes to Orleans, having command of a large force, _ib._
    she reinforces and revictuals Orleans, vi. 260
    requests the king to send a large reinforcement to pursue
    his enemies, vi. 265
    conquers the town of Gergeau, vi. 268
    overthrows Franquet d'Arras, and has his head cut off, vi. 342
    is taken prisoner by the Burgundians, before Compiègne, vi. 343
    is condemned to be put to death, and burnt at Rouen, vii. 15

  Joan, duchess of Luxembourg, i. 109, 110

  John XXIII. elected pope, ii. 162
    ceremonials of his coronation, ii. 163
    his request of tenths rejected by the French church, ii. 210
    requests aid of the French king against the king Ladislaus, ii. 214
    flies from Rome, and fixes his court at Bologna, iii. 173
    is dethroned, iv. 87
    is released from prison, made a cardinal by pope Martin,
    and dies, iv. 386

  John, king of Arragon, a deed of arms is performed before him, i. 95

  John, brother to the duke of Bar, slain at the battle of
  Azincourt, iv. 185

  John of Bavaria, bishop, makes his entry into Liege after the
  battle of Eichtfeld, ii. 39
    surnamed John the Pitiless, ii. 41
    dies, vi. 112. See Liege

  John of Montfort, duke of Brittany, dies, i. 39

  John de Moreul, knight to the duke of Burgundy, appointed
  ambassador, iii. 178

  John de Nevers is ordered to lay siege to Moreiul, vii. 156

  John, sir, bastard de St Pol, is taken prisoner by the French, vii. 91

  John de Toisy, bishop of Tournay, death of, vii. 118

  Josquin, Philip, acquires great riches in the service of the
  duke of Burgundy, v. 132

  Josse, son of the duke of Burgundy, born at Ghent, vii. 106

  Joinville, the lord de, refuses, but upon conditions, to deliver
  up the castle of Montereau to the dauphin, v. 128

  Jubilee in France, for the support of a war against the Turks, xii. 73

  Juchy, near Cambray, twelve houses burnt at, x. 62

  Julian the apostate, fell through covetousness, i. 236

  Julius II. pope, by the assistance of the French, gains Bologna, xii. 106
    regains several places from the Venetians, xii. 117
    goes to war with the king of France, xii. 121

  Julius II. pope, his army united with the Venetians and Spaniards
  is defeated by the French near Ravenna, xii. 131
    dies at Rome in the ninth year of his pontificate, xii. 142

  Justice and royalty, i. 340

  Juy, John de, the accuser of John Coustain, beheaded, x. 112


  K.

  Kent, the earl of, killed at the battle of Baugey, v. 263

  Kerennier, le, attaches himself to the king's army to drive
  out the English from Normandy, vii. 303

  Kiriel, sir Thomas, defeats the count de Clermont, vi. 322
    is taken prisoner by the French, vi. 391
    is appointed governor of Clermont castle, vii. 66
    takes Valognes, ix. 106
    is defeated by the count de Clermont, ix. 112


  L.

  Lagny-sur-Marne, the bulwark at, is conquered by the English, vii. 76
    the duke of Bedford marches to the aid of, vii. 83

  La Hire made prisoner, v. 259

  La Hire, Estienne de Vignolles, takes Louviers, vi. 327

  La Hire, and others overrun Artois and Cambresis, vii. 145
    treacherously makes the lord d'Auffemont a prisoner, vii. 177
    gains the castle of Breteuil, in the Beauvoisis, by storm, vii. 182
    takes the old fort of Amiens, vii. 192
    he and several others defeat the earl of Arundel, vii. 197
    a truce is agreed on between him and the Burgundians, vii. 208
    overruns and forages the country of the duke of Burgundy during
    the convention at Arras, vii. 234
    conquers Gisors, and loses it soon afterwards, vii. 342
    is wounded at the siege of Calais, vii. 362
    conquers the town and castle of Soissons, vii. 395
    is nearly taking Rouen, but is defeated, viii. 11
    commits great waste in several counties, viii. 33
    is taken prisoner, viii. 35
    is liberated and goes to the king, viii. 37
    makes excursions into Germany, viii. 107
    dies, viii. 342

  Lalain, sir James de, makes an inroad to the walls of Ghent, ix. 240
    is slain before Poulcres, ix. 262

  Lallier, Michel, his wife reveals the conspiracy at Paris, iv. 220

  La Mothe, the town of, is taken by storm by the bastard
  of Bourbon, viii. 177

  Lancelot, or Ladislaus, king of Naples, invades Florence, ii. 103

  Lancelot de Lisle, sir, is slain at the siege of Orleans, vi. 239

  Laon, the French are defeated at, vii. 143

  La Réole, siege of, by Charles VII. viii. 340

  La Roche-Guyon, siege of, v. 112

  Laws have double meaning, i. 268

  Lau, the lord du, arrested and imprisoned because in disguise, xi. 19
    falls into disgrace with the king and is confined in the castle
   of Usson, xi. 52
    escapes, xi. 69

  Launoy, the lord de, receives many favours from king Louis XI. x. 135

  Laurens du Puy, ordered to be arrested by the queen of France,
  and is drowned in attempting to escape, iv. 259

  Lectoure regained from the count d'Armagnac, xi. 147
    burnt and razed to the ground, _ib._

  Le Bourg castle, siege of, ix. 163

  Leger, John, put to death at Rouen, iv. 281

  Leigny les-Chastiniers castle destroyed by the duke of Burgundy, vi. 396

  Lens, sir Charles de, arrested, iii. 213

  Leo X. pope, succeeds Julius II. xii. 142
    sends Prospero Colonna with a force to join the emperor
    Maximilian, xii. 177
    holds a conference with Francis I. at Bologna, xii. 195

  Lore, the lady Ambrose de, widow of sir Robert d'Estouteville,
  dies, xi. 64

  Libourne taken by the French, ix. 305

  Liege, the bishop of, ejected for refusing to be consecrated
  as a churchman, i. 176

  Liege, the bishop of, takes arms against the Liegeois, i. 178
    many of the inhabitants of, beheaded and drowned, ii. 40
    meeting for settling the affairs of, ii. 44
    the town of, destroyed, xi. 78

  Liegeois, the, arm against the Hainaulters, i. 177
    resolve to combat the duke of Burgundy and John of Bavaria, ii. 25, 26
    surrender themselves to the dukes of Burgundy and Holland, ii 38
    raise a large army, and invade Namur, vi. 352
    peace between them and the duke of Burgundy, vii. 112
    enter into an alliance with Louis XI. against the duke of
    Burgundy and the count de Charolois, x. 268
    lay siege to the town of Luxembourg, _ib._
    discomfited at Montenac, x. 285
    obtain a truce with the count de Charolois, x. 308
    recommence the war against the duke of Burgundy, x. 301
    besiege the town of Huys, proceedings of the duke against them, xi. 46

  Lievin Nevelin, doctor, ambassador from the college of cardinals
  to the duke of Burgundy, iv. 352

  Lignac, sir Philip de, endeavours to make peace between the
  duke of Berry and the king, iii. 63

  Ligne, the lord de, in Hainault, taken prisoner at the battle
  of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Ligny en Barrois, siege of the town and castle of, v. 207

  Ligny, the count de, and others, keep the appointed day at
  Villiers le Carbonnel, vii. 141

  Lihons, invaded and pillaged, iv. 231
    the English commit great depredations at, viii. 183

  Lindsay, sir Walter, killed at the battle of Verneuil, vi. 94

  Lion, a tame one, kept by a gentleman of Auvergne, escapes
  and does much mischief, x. 303

  L'Isle-Adam, the lord, submits to the duke of Burgundy, iv. 332
    he and the lord de Croy lead an expedition toward the
    Auxerrois, v. 178
    is sent to garrison Joigny, v. 224
    is reproved by Henry V. for looking that monarch in
    the face, v. 224
    is arrested, by orders of the duke of Exeter, v. 261
    is liberated, vi. 9
    turns against the English, vii. 309
    enters Paris, which submits to the king, vii. 327
    is slain at Bruges, viii. 18

  Lisieux, the city of, is taken by the count de Dunois, ix. 17

  Lithuania, the king of, invades Prussia, ii. 154

  Limbourg, duchy of, i. 113.

  Loigny castle, taken by the seneschal of Poitou, ix. 20

  Lombards and Gascons, teach their military horses certain
  strange movements, ii. 205

  London, the populace of, rise against the king's officers, viii. 431

  Longueval, the lord de, conquers the castle of Aumale, vi. 299
    turns to the king's party, vi. 85

  Longueval, sir Arthur, enters St Quentin in the name of Louis XI. xi. 108

  Longueval, John de, seizes the towns of Arleux and Crevecoeur for
  the bastard of Burgundy, x. 226

  Lorraine, the duke of, with the lords de Ront and de Heilly,
  attack and defeat a party from Bourges, iii. 62

  Lorraine, the duke of, opposes the duke of Burgundy at Morat in
  Swisserland, and in the county of Romont, xi. 235
    recovers the town of Nancy, xi. 238
    destroys the Burgundian army, the duke of Burgundy slain, xi. 247, 252
    reduces the duchy and county of Burgundy to the king, xi. 255

  Louis, the dauphin, is persuaded to join in a conspiracy against the
  government of Charles VII. viii. 190
    returns to the court to seek pardon, viii. 193
    some of his men invade Burgundy, viii. 377

  Louis de Valois, dauphin of France, takes refuge with duke Philip
  of Burgundy, ix. 383
    accompanies the duke to Bruges, and is honourably received, ix. 402

  Louis XI. crowned at Rheims, x. 73
    makes his public entry into Paris, x. 77, 83
    takes leave of the duke of Burgundy and leaves Paris for Amboise, x. 85
    abolishes the pragmatic sanction, x. 94
    grants succours to queen Margaret of England, x. 119
    makes a progress through his kingdom to examine the state of it, x. 127

  Louis XI. repurchases the towns on the Somme from the duke
  of Burgundy, x. 132
    summons the count de Saint Pol, and the lord de Genly to appear
    before him, x. 136
    comes to Arras and Tournay, x. 153
    comes to Hêdin, entertained by the duke of Burgundy, x. 166
    summons deputies from the towns on the Somme, to Rouen, x. 174
    appoints the count de Nevers governor of Picardy, and sends an
    embassy to the duke of Burgundy at Lille, x. 175
    orders Crevecoeur near Cambray to be taken possession of, x. 185
    his correspondence with the duke of Bourbon, respecting the
    flight of the duke of Berry, x. 216
    publishes other letters throughout his realm, x. 219.
    advance of the army of the count de Charolois, x. 236, 241
    resolves to combat him, defeated at Montlehery, x. 244, 251
    sends the bishop of Paris to negotiate, x. 257
    leaves Paris for Rouen to recruit his army, x. 261
    returns to Paris and procures a truce, x. 263
    forms an alliance with the Liegeois against the duke of Burgundy
    and the count de Charolois, x. 268
    meets the count de Charolois at Conflans, x. 276
    establishes a treaty of peace, x. 286
    royal edict respecting what he had conceded to the count, x. 290

  Louis XI. is present at a review of the count de Charolois'
  army, x. 298
    goes into, and retakes possession of the duchy of Normandy, x. 304
    orders some of the lords of that country to be arrested and
    drowned, x. 306
    advances toward Angers to learn the intentions of his brother's
    partisans, x. 377
    enters the Bourbonnois and takes many towns and castles, x. 380
    lays siege to Riom in Auvergne, x. 386
    comes to Paris after the battle of Montlehery, x. 390
    grants several favours to the inhabitants, x. 396
    nobles arrive from Normandy to serve him against the
    confederates, x. 417
    confirms the privileges of the Parisians and offers them
    new ones, xi. 2
    goes to Orleans, xi. 5
    proceeds to Normandy, meets the duke of Brittany at Caen, xi. 8
    recovers the duchy of Normandy from his brother, xi. 11
    sends ambassadors to England, xi. 17, 18
    issues an edict against the English, xi. 20
    sends commissioners to make reforms at Paris, xi. 24
    appoints certain lords for the guard and defence of his realm, xi. 28
    goes to Rouen to meet the earl of Warwick, xi. 32
    orders the Parisians to have banners for the respective trades and
    professions, _ib._

  Louis XI. musters the banners without the walls of Paris, xi. 42
    goes on a pilgrimage on foot to St Denis, xi. 44
    gives letters to abolish the pragmatic sanction, xi. 47
    concludes a truce with the count de Charolois, in which the Liegeois
    are not included, xi. 54
    sends commissioners to muster the banners, his army marches to oppose
    the Bretons between Mans and Alençon, xi. 56
    consents to the assembly of the three estates at Tours, xi. 60
    goes to Meaux, xi. 67
    substance of what passed between him and the dukes of Berry and
    Brittany, xi. 71
    concludes a peace with the duke of Burgundy, xi. 72
    goes on a pilgrimage to Notre Dame of Halle, xi. 76
    sends all the live game round Paris as a token of friendship to
    the count de Foix, xi. 80
    receives the king and queen of Sicily, is reconciled to his brother,
    now duke of Guienne, xi. 90
    summons the van and rear van to oppose Edward king of England, xi. 94
    signs a peace with the duke of Brittany, xi. 101
    orders a thanksgiving for the delivery of Henry VI. king of
    England, xi. 106
    his victories in Burgundy, Charolois and Picardy, xi. 112
    goes to Paris and Orleans with the duke of Guienne and others, xi. 116

  Louis XI. obtains indulgences for those who shall say Ave Maria
  three times, xi. 124
    sends commissioners to settle differences with the duke of
    Burgundy, xi. 153
    marries his eldest daughter to the lord de Beaujeu, xi. 156
    discovers a plot for poisoning him, xi. 158
    his edicts respecting the gens d'armes and coin, xi. 160, 161
    an embassy arrives from the king of Arragon, xi. 164
    reviews the Parisians, accompanied by the Arragonian ambassadors,
    xi. 165
    agrees to a truce with the duke of Burgundy, xi. 169
    sends a large army to conquer Arragon, xi. 170
    receives a summons from king Edward to restore to him the duchies
    of Guienne and Normandy, xi. 174
    good news from the army of Arragon, xi. 176
    orders troops into the territories of the duke of Burgundy to
    retaliate the damages done in contempt of the truce, xi. 179
    concludes an alliance with the emperor of Germany, ambassadors
    from Florence and the emperor, xi. 183
    his prudent acts, takes Tronquoy, Mondidier and other places from
    the Burgundians, xi. 184, 185
    gives notice of the arrival of the English at Calais, and orders
    his vassals to be in readiness, xi. 193
    goes to Pecquigny, to hold a conference with the king of
    England, xi. 195

  Louis XI. agrees to a truce, pays king Edward seventy-five
  thousand crowns, and promises an annual pension of fifty
  thousand, xi. 197, 198
    concludes a truce with the duke of Burgundy, xi. 201
    his conversation with the count de Roussy, xi. 207
    orders a council, and establishes certain taxes, xi. 223
    meets the king of Sicily at Lyon, ransoms queen Margaret
    of England, xi. 232
    makes several pilgrimages, xi. 237
    informed of the death of the duke of Burgundy, he makes a
    pilgrimage of devotion, xi. 255
    reduces Arras, Hêdin, and other towns and countries which the
    duke had usurped in France, xi. 256
    summons his parliament from Paris to Noyon to try the duke of
    Nemours, xi. 262
    on his return from Picardy sets at liberty the prisoner's
    confined in the Châtelet, xi. 278
    has twelve great bombards made, xi. 280
    his troops gain the town of Condé from the Burgundians, xi. 291
    amused and deceived by the duke of Austria, xi. 297
    holds a council at Orleans for recovering the pragmatic
    sanction, xi. 301
    forms an alliance with the king of Castille, xi. 303
    his preparations for war with Austria, xi. 309

  Louis XI. several towns in Burgundy reduced to his obedience,
  xi. 311
    ambassadors arrive at Paris from Spain, xi. 312
    defeats the duke of Austria near Therouenne, xi. 314
    his troops are again successful and gain seventeen towns, xi. 317
    an embassy from England, he issues a commission against the
    duke of Bourbon, xi. 409
    concludes a truce with the duke of Austria, xi. 320
    sets cardinal Ballue at liberty, xi. 323
    subsidizes a body of Swiss in lieu of the franc-archers, _ib._
    forms a camp between Pont de l'Arche and Pont St Pierre, xi. 326
    recovers from a severe illness and performs certain pilgrimages,
    during which he visits the dauphin, xi. 330
    receives an embassy from Flanders at Clery, xi. 335
    again taken ill, visits his son at Amboise and recommends to him
    Olivier le Daim, xi. 340
    makes peace with the Flemings, xi. 342
    sends for the holy ampulla from the church of St Remy at
    Rheims, xi. 352
    his devout death and burial in the church of our Lady at
    Clery, xi. 354

  Louis XII. duke of Orleans, consecrated king of France at Rheims, xii. 41
   sends an army to recover the Milanese, xii. 45

  Louis XII. sends troops to reconquer Naples which in a short
  time is won, xii. 73
    makes war against the Turks by sea and land, xii. 77
    goes to Lombardy and makes his public entry into Genoa, xii. 79
    taken with a serious illness, xii. 101
    orders a large force to join the pope, xii. 107
    defeats the Venetians at Agnadello, xii. 113
    makes a triumphant entry into Milan, xii. 116
    goes to war with the pope on account of the duke of Ferrara, xii. 121
    victory of the duke of Nemours near to Ravenna, xii. 129
    sends succours to the king of Navarre, xii. 144
    his army defeated by the Swiss at Novara, xii. 148
    a body of his troops attacked and put to flight by the English
    and Hainaulters, xii. 151
    makes peace with the Venetians, xii. 155
    marries Mary, sister to Henry VIII. of England, xii. 164
    his death and interment, xii. 169

  Louvroy, siege of, v. 325

  Louvain, Pierre, murdered by sir Raoul de Flavy, x. 163

  Lovecte, Thomas, a monk of the temple at Paris, murdered by one
  of his brethren, xi. 36

  Louviers, the town of, surrenders to the duke of Bourbon for
  Louis XI. xi. 11

  Louviers, Charles de, cup-bearer to Louis XI. wins the prize,
  at a tournament at Paris, xi. 67

  Lucca, reception of Charles VIII. at, xi. 410

  Lucifer, account of his rebellion in heaven, i. 246

  Lupus, a Hussite-heretic, is slain in Bohemia, vii. 151

  Lusignan, John de, succeeds to the kingdom of Cyprus, vii. 82

  Luxembourg, sir John de, made governor of Arras, iv. 41
    attacks the town of Hamme, _ib._
    marries Joan of Bethune, v. 59
    sends six hundred combatants to meet his brother in the county
    of Brienne, v. 85
    assembles a large body of men at Arras, and leads them
    before Roye, v. 152
    makes an excursion with his whole force toward Alibaudieres,
    v. 172, 174
    is blinded in one eye during the siege, and puts an end to
    the attack, v. 176
    witnesses a deed of arms against six champions of the
    Dauphinois, v. 281
    disbands his forces, and retires to his castle of
    Beaurevoir, v. 312
    waits on Henry V. to solicit the liberty of his brother the
    count de Conversan, v. 318
    conquers the fortresses of Quesnoy, Louvroy, and Hericourt, v. 323
    takes Oysi in Tierrache, vi. 74
    besieges the church of Broissi, _ib._
    besieges the castle of Wiege, vi. 76
    he lays in ambush, in which Poton de Saintrailles is made
    prisoner, vi. 77
    besieges the town of Guise, vi. 79

  Luxembourg, sir John de, besieges Beaumont in Argonne, vi. 224
    takes command of the siege of Compiègne, vi. 366
    some captains attached to him surprise the castle of
    St Martin, vii. 1
    marches into Champagne against the French, vii. 57
    he is joined by the earl of Warwick's son and others, vii. 56
    reconquers the castle of Haphincourt, vii. 139
    refuses to join the duke of Burgundy against the English,
    till he is discharged of his oath to the English, viii. 53
    sends letters to the knights of the Golden Fleece, viii. 139
    sends letters to exculpate himself to the great council of
    the duke of Burgundy, viii. 161
    dies, viii. 247, 250

  Luxembourg, Louis de, marries Joan of Bar, vii. 213
    count de St Pol, his men rob the king's servants as they were
    conducting warlike stores to Tournay, viii. 260
    makes reparation for the injury done to the king, viii. 264
    he and the count of Eu, take the new castle of Nicrops, ix. 34

  Luxembourg, Louis, the constable, his treachery, xi. 188
    is delivered by the duke of Burgundy to the king's officers,
    and carried prisoner to the bastile, xi. 205
    his trial and execution, xi. 211, 212
    a short epitaph on him, xi. 219

  Luxembourg, the duchy of, is reduced to obedience to the duke
  of Burgundy, xi. 364, 375

  Lyon, various processions at; occasioned by the mortality of
  the season, xii. 198

  Lyonnet de Bournouville, v. 83

  Lyons, the inhabitants of, rebel, viii. 9
    council of, viii. 415


  M.

  Maestricht, the town of, surrenders to John of Bavaria, i. 181
   siege of, ii. 24

  Mahomet II. See Morbesan.

  Maillotin de Bours combats sir Hector de Flavy at Arras, vii. 5

  Mailly castle is besieged by the king's army, viii. 345

  Mailly, sir Robinet de, is suffocated in a bog while attending the duke
  of Burgundy, v. 169

  Malatesta, the lord, makes a proposition for the removal of the
  council of Pisa, ii. 95

  Malefactors, three, two men and a woman, are hung for various
  enormous crimes in Paris, viii. 434

  Malcolm Fleming. See David de Combrebant.

  Malmaison castle taken by sir John Blondel, vi. 205
    it is surrendered by sir John Blondel, vi. 209

  Manniel, Gauvain, lieutenant-general of the bailiff of Rouen,
  beheaded, xi. 16

  Mansart du Bos, sir, ii. 269
    beheaded, ii. 351
    his head and body restored and interred, iii. 136

  Mans, St Julian, siege of, vi. 165

  Mans, siege of, viii. 419

  Mantes, summoned to surrender to the king of France, ix. 18

  Marchant, Andrieu, appointed provost of Paris, iii. 243

  Marche, de la, count, defeated at Yeure-la-Ville, iii. 5
    goes into Italy, and marries Johanna queen of Naples, iv. 199

  Marêts, Charles des, is appointed governor of Dieppe, vii. 303

  Margaret, the duchess, heiress of Flanders, i. 112
    dies, i. 120

  Margaret, queen of England, defeated by Edward earl of Marche,
  seeks aid from the Scots, x. 57
    goes to France, to require aid of her cousin german the king, x. 98
    her hard fortune, and singular adventure with a robber, x. 125
    holds a conference with the duke of Burgundy, x. 126
    visits Louis XI. with her son the prince of Wales, xi. 99
    her honourable reception at Paris, xi. 107
    the victory of king Edward and death of her son, xi. 115
    is ransomed by the king of France, xi. 233

  Marignano, the battle of, between the Swiss and Francis I. xii. 183, 186

  Mark, sir William de la, levies a war against the bishop of Liege
  and kills him, xi. 337

  Marle, Henry de, fearful of arrest, promises to pay a large sum
  to the king, iii. 131

  Marle, the count, is slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Marle, siege of, viii. 263

  Marmonde, the town of, admits Charles VII. viii. 340

  Martelet, sir du Mesnil, taken prisoner by the duke of Burgundy, iv. 211
    is tortured and hung, iv. 212

  Martin, king of Arragon, i. 95

  Martin, pope, iv. 87
    is elected head of the church by the council of Constance, iv. 299
    adjourns the council of Constance, v. 28
    sends a croisade against Bohemia, v. 206
    sends his bull to John duke of Brabant, vi. 144
    declares the marriage between the duke of Glocester and Jacquiline
    duchess of Bavaria, void, vi. 197

  Mary of Anjou, dowager queen of France, dies, x. 136

  Mary, dowager countess of Blois, i. 160

  Mary, the princess, sister to Henry VIII. of England is married
  to Louis XII. xii. 164
    makes her public entry into Paris, xii. 165

  Massa, a burgh and castle, visited by Charles VIII. in his march
  through Italy, xi. 409

  Mathagon, captain, lays siege to St Severin, vii. 174

  Matthew, count de Foix, i. 118

  Matthew, bastard of Bourbon, made prisoner at Foronuovo, xii. 29

  Maucour, the lord de, beheaded by orders of Henry VI. vi. 96

  Maufroy, sir, de St Leger, and the bastard de St Pol lead an army
  into Barrois, vi. 107

  Maugué, John, killed at Paris by the bursting of a bombard, xi. 305

  Mauléon castle taken by the count de Foix, ix. 43

  Mauroy, sir, de St Leger, takes the castle of Chaulnes, iv. 230
    in conjunction with Jean d'Aubigny, invades and pillages Lihon, iv. 231

  Maximilian, duke of Austria, sends ambassadors to Louis XI. xi. 296
    defeated near Therouenne, xi. 314
    concludes a truce, xi. 320
    seizes the town of Arras, xi. 375
    concludes a peace with Charles VIII. xi. 377

  Maximilian, the emperor, joins the league of Cambray, xii. 112
    assembles a large army to attempt the conquest of the Milanese, and
    drive the French from Italy, xii. 198
    marches away from Milan, xii. 202

  Meaux, siege of, v. 305
    is stormed, v. 320
    surrenders, v. 344

  Medici, Guiliano de, assassinated by the Pazzi at Florence, xi. 272
    Lorenzo de, wounded, xi. 273
    Pietro de, places himself under the protection of
    Charles VIII. xi. 408

  Mello, sir John de, a Spanish knight, combats the lord de
  Chargny, vii. 223
    his dress during the combat, vii. 226
    fought with his vizor up, vii. 228

  Melun, siege of, v. 208

  Melun, surrender of the town and castle of, v. 227

  Menau, sir Pierre de, beheaded, iv. 33

  Mercq castle besieged, i. 126
    the French totally defeated at, i. 129

  Merville, the lord de, taken prisoner and hanged by the Burgundians
  and Bretons, xi. 69

  Metz, siege of, viii. 392
    treaty of, viii. 396

  Meulan, the bridge of, is besieged by the English, vii. 301

  Meur de Châtel, an assembly held at, respecting the murder of
  the duke of Orleans, ii. 157

  Mezieres, sir Philip de, i. 404

  Milan, duke of, makes the kings of Arragon and Navarre
  prisoners, vii. 227
    yields up to his nephew, the duke of Orleans, the county
    of Asti, viii. 418
    assassinated, xi. 244

  Milan, taken by the French, xii. 45
    retaken by the duke Ludovico Sforza, xii. 46
    the inhabitants are bribed into subjection, xii. 53
    taken possession of by the Swiss on the departure of the French
    from Italy, xii. 138

  Melun, Charles de, beheaded for suffering the escape of the lord
  du Lau, xi. 69, 70

  Mirandola restored to John Franciscus Picus, xii. 116

  Miramount, the lord de, ii. 27

  Miraumont, village of, iv. 42

  Moerbeke, the Ghent men are defeated at, ix. 224

  Mohammedism, origin of, i. 241

  Monchas castle in Normandy is taken by the French, vii. 88
    siege of, vii. 84

  Monk of St Denis's account of the murder of the duke of Orleans, i. 201

  Monster, a girl born at Verona, with one head, two feet and
  four arms, xi. 275

  Mons, in Vimeu, rencountre at, v. 290
    names of the principal lords who had accompanied and remained with
    the duke of Burgundy, and of the principal Dauphinois, v. 298

  Montagu, Charles de, marries Catherine d'Albert, ii. 118

  Montagu, Gerard de, consecrated bishop of Paris, ii. 116

  Montagu, grand master of the king's household, sent to confer with the
  duke of Burgundy, ii. 66
    is arrested, ii. 129
    beheaded, ii. 131
    his hotel and furniture given to the count of Hainault, ii. 132
    his body is taken from the gibbet and joined to the head to be
    decently interred, iii. 90

  Montagu, the lord de, narrowly escapes with his life during the murder
  of the duke of Burgundy, v. 122
    refuses to deliver up the castle of Montereau to the dauphin, v. 128
    writes letters to several of the principal towns of France
    respecting the murder of the duke of Burgundy, v. 137

  Montagu, the lord de, a Burgundian, concludes a treaty with
  La Hire, vi. 107

  Montaigu, the fortress of, is destroyed by orders of the duke
  of Burgundy, viii. 276

  Mont-Aquilon, siege of, vi. 39

  Montargis and Chevreuse, the towns and castles of, submit to
  Charles VII. viii. 98

  Montargis, siege of, vi. 109

  Montauban, the lord de, admiral of France, dies, xi. 21

  Montereau-faut-Yonne, is besieged by Charles VII. and
  reconquered, viii. 27, 28

  Montenay, sir James, seizes sir James de Monstrade, with a
  design to stab him, i. 100

  Mont-Epiloy, a party of English defeated near, v. 239

  Montferrat, the marchioness of and her son place themselves
  under the protection of Charles VIII. xi. 402

  Montgardin, sir Baldwin de, taken prisoner by the duke of
  Burgundy, ii. 35

  Mont-Guyon, is besieged by the count de Dunois, ix. 159

  Montlehery, siege of, iv. 344. v. 50
    battle of, x. 244, 253
    various accounts of reported in various places, x. 264
    recapitulation and further description of the battle, x. 359
    other particulars not mentioned by Monstrelet, x. 406

  Morbesan, Mahomet II. besieges and captures Constantinople, ix. 314
    plan for resisting him, ix. 331
    sends letters to the pope, ix. 335

  Morbesan, emperor of the Turks, besieges Belgrade, ix. 377

  Moreau, Pierre, attaches himself to the Ghent men, ix. 254
    makes an attack on Dendermonde, _ib._

  Moreuil, siege of, vii. 156

  Mortaigne, damsel of, judgment given against, ix. 343

  Mortain, count de, dies of a dysentery, iii. 77

  Mortain, siege of, ix. 16

  Mory, Laurence de, hanged for high treason, for having favoured
  the Burgundians, x. 392

  Moses, justified in slaying the tyrannical Egyptian, i. 271

  Maulevrier, the count of, seneschal of Normandy, murders his wife
  and his huntsman for adultery, xi. 233

  Monk, the Little, attempts to gain the castle of St Angelo at
  Rome, vii. 102
    is detected and executed, vii. 104

  Moy, the lord de, the men of, lose the castle of Roullet, viii. 109

  Moyennes, the castle of, besieged, ii. 343
    siege of, vi. 175, 196

  Murder, forbidden by every law, i. 265

  Murray, earl of, killed at Verneuil, vi. 93

  Mussi-l'Evêque, siege of, vii. 127


  N.

  Namur, the count de, dies, and makes the duke of Burgundy
  his heir, vi. 246
    is invaded by the Liegeois, vi. 352

  Naples, triumphant entry of Charles VIII. into, xii. 1
    attack and capture of the Castel Nuovo and the Castel
    del Ovo, xii. 2, 4

  Navarre, Louis, king of, and other princes of the blood, resolve
  to reform the management of the royal finances, ii. 127
    makes propositions to the king relative to his majesty's
    ministers, ii. 194

  Navarre, Louis, king of, is made prisoner by the duke of
  Milan, vii. 237
    demands succour of the king of France against the king of
    Arragon, xii. 143
    dies, xii. 205

  Neapolitans, the, rebel against their king, and take the
  queen prisoner, iv. 257

  Neelle, the inhabitants of, resign the keys to the duke of
  Burgundy, and swear affiance to the king, ii. 295
    storming of the castle of, iv. 234
    the lands of, are overrun by the French, viii. 198

  Negotiations relative to the resignations of popes Gregory
  and Benedict, i. 182, 187

  Nemours, the duke of, is made prisoner at Carlat, in the
  king's name, xi. 266
    found guilty of high treason and beheaded, xi. 267

  Nemours, Gaston de Foix, created duke of, xii. 118
    besieges Bologna, xii. 122
    takes Brescia with great slaughter, xii. 125
    defeats the united armies of the pope, the Venetians,
    and the Spaniards, but is himself killed, xii. 129

  Nevers, John, count of, i. 113

  Nevers, Philip, count de, his marriage with the damsel of Coucy, ii. 79
    brother to the duke of Burgundy, slain at the battle of
    Azincourt, iv. 185
    appointed governor of Picardy, x. 175
    issues proclamations for the king, throughout the provinces
    of his lieutenancy, x. 221

  Nevers, count de, endeavours at a reconciliation with the
  count de Charolois, x. 228
    made prisoner in the castle of Peronne, x. 282

  Nicholas V. elected pope, ix. 411
    marries the emperor of Germany to the daughter of the king
    of Portugal ix. 190
    sends a legate to France respecting peace, ix. 191
    notifies to the duke of Burgundy a croisade against the
    Turks, ix. 289
    dies, ix. 349

  Nicosia, is plundered by the Saracens, vi. 189

  Nicrops castle, siege of, ix. 33

  Nieneve, is fortified by the Ghent men, ix. 215

  Noëlle, besieged by the English, vi. 41

  Nogent, surrenders to the count de St Pol, ix. 7

  Nouaille, the lord de, murdered, v. 174

  Normandy, the whole duchy of, is reduced to obedience to
  Charles VII. ix. 141
    extent of, _ib._
    the common people of, rise against the English garrison, vii. 178
    they assemble in large bodies before Caen, vii. 191

  Northumberland, earl of, his unsuccessful application to the king
  of France against the king of England, i. 164

  Nôtre Dame, church of, solemnities at, x. 282

  Norwich, bishop of, iv. 145

  Nove, Paul di, doge of Genoa, beheaded, xii. 110

  Novara, the town and castle of, surrender to Francis I. xii. 181

  Noyelle, the lord de, taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Noyon, the parliament summoned to, to try the duke of Nemours, xi. 262

  Nuys, a town near Cologne, besieged by the duke of Burgundy, xi. 172
    relieved by the Germans from Cologne, xi. 178


  O.

  Octavian, the emperor, anecdote of i. 351

  Odart de Remy, is killed at the siege of Lagny, vii. 87

  Offemont, the lord de, enters St Riquier, v. 276
    is made prisoner by the English, v. 321

  Oliver de Blois, count of Penthievre, marries Isabella, daughter
  of the duke of Burgundy, i. 165

  Olivier le Daim, his infamous character from Comines, xi. 282 note.
    hanged at Paris, xi. 360

  Ollehaing, lord de, advocate of the duke of Burgundy, ii. 72
    disputes with the chancellor of France, iii. 133
    is thrust out of the council chamber, iii. 134

  Opiterge, a youth martyred there by the Jews, xi. 274

  Oran, the island of, discoveries of the Portuguese on, xii. 120

  Orange, the prince of, is conquered by the French, vi. 370
    restored to liberty by Louis XI. without ransom, xi. 192

  Orange, the prince of, his troops defeated in Burgundy by the
  lord de Craon, xi. 265
    his devastations in Burgundy, xi. 279

  Orchimont, the town and castle of, are destroyed by Everard
  de la Marche, vii. 340

  Orfevre, John l', president of Luxembourg, pleads before the
  king for the duke d'Alençon, x. 3

  Orgemont, lord de, John, bishop of Paris, death of, ii. 115

  Oriole, a Gascon captain and his lieutenant, beheaded at Tours, xi. 307

  Orleans, Louis, duke of, takes possession of the duchy of
  Luxembourg, i. 43
    sends a challenge to Henry, king of England, i. 55
    his second letter to the king of England, in reply, i. 67
    is commissioned to remonstrate with the pope on the necessity
    of union in the church, i. 116
    defeated in his attempt to carry off the dauphin of France, i. 138
    sends an immense force into Paris, i. 149
    publishes circular letters throughout France, concerning the
    defamations of the duke of Burgundy, i. 151
    reconciled to the duke of Burgundy, i. 155
    besieges Blaye and Le Bourg, i. 168
    is presented with the duchy of Acquitaine, i. 188
    is assassinated at Paris, i. 192, 193
    mourning, and order of the procession at his funeral, i. 196, 197
    exertions made to discover his murderers, i. 196

  Orleans, Louis, duke of, charged with covetousness, i. 286
    charged with having committed high treason against the king, i. 287
    devised the death of the king by sorcery, i. 288
    contracted illegal alliances, i. 290
    offended the king in the person of the queen, i. 293
    devised the death of the dauphin by poison, i. 296
    guilty of high treason by false representations to the pope, i. 297
    treasonably offended against the public welfare, i. 298
    reply to the charges against, i. 333
    his character as delineated by the duchess dowager, i. 348
    cleared from the charge of tyranny, i. 367
    cleared from the charge of witchcraft, i. 390
    did much service to the church, i. 393
    gave no aid to the schism, i. 394
    the king of France has solemn obsequies performed for him, iv. 92

  Orleans, Charles, duke of, son of the murdered duke, sends letters
  to the king against the duke of Burgundy and his party, ii. 225
    several of his captains assemble an army, ii. 235
    writes again to the king, ii. 236
    is taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194
    is brought to Calais during a meeting respecting peace, viii. 218
    is conveyed back to England, viii. 219

  Orleans, Charles, duke of, obtains his liberty by means of the duke
  of Burgundy, viii. 226
    marries the lady of Cleves, viii. 231
    leaves Bruges with his duchess, viii. 243
    is not permitted to see the king on his release, viii. 349
    returns to the duke of Burgundy from France, viii. 403
    receives from the hands of the duke of Milan, the county
    of Asti, viii. 418
    dies, x. 187

  Orleans faction assemble in large numbers near Paris, ii. 190
    application is made to them by the king and the university of
    Paris to disband their army, ii. 190, 191
    plunder the country round Paris, ii. 197
    condemned to death by the king, ii. 198
    peace between them and the king, ii. 200
    the natives of Paris take up arms against, ii. 278
    enter the town of Roye by fraud, ii. 279
    overrun the country of Burgundy, ii. 283
    return toward Paris, ii. 305
    proclamations issued against, ii. 309
    are declared rebels and traitors, ii. 316
    are sentenced to banishment and excommunication, ii. 319
    assemble their whole army at St Denis, and forage, ii. 323

  Orleans faction retire to their respective countries to reinforce
  their armies, ii 332
    many of their adherents executed, ii. 334
    reduced to great distress, ii. 346
    many of them perish in prison, ii. 351
    are harrassed by the king of France on the frontiers, iii. 1
    send an embassy to England, iii. 13
    their ambassadors attacked and defeated, iii. 14
    their intercepted letters to England, ib.
    insult and abuse the Burgundians before Bourges, iii. 57
    behave treacherously, and attempt the life of the duke of Burgundy
    near Bourges, iii. 58
    harrass the king's foragers, iii. 61
    their meeting for peace near Bourges, iii. 70, 71
    treaty of peace between them and the king, iii. 73
    are in favour at Paris, iii. 216, 233
    effectually govern the king and the duke of Acquitaine, iv. 97
    are routed and dispersed at Paris, v. 13
    several are cruelly put to death by the Parisians, v. 21

  Orleans, duchess of, complains to the king of the murder of her
  husband, i. 207
    details the manner in which the duke was murdered, i. 208
    again complains of the murder of the duke, i. 331
    conclusion of her defence of the character of the duke, ii. 1
    reply to, by the chancellor, ii. 15

  Orleans, duchess of, dies broken-hearted, ii. 67

  Orleans, town of, is besieged by the earl of Salisbury, vi. 234
    the siege is raised by the maid Joan, vi. 264
    inhabitants of, send supplies to Beauvais, xi. 323
    the duke of, his gallant conduct at Genoa, xi. 397, 398

  Ormond, John, governor of Vernon, insults the king of France by sending
  him old keys, ix. 22

  Orsay castle, siege of, vi. 40

  Orval, the lord of, defeats the men of Bordeaux, ix. 154

  Oudenarde, is besieged by the Ghent men, ix. 202

  Ourse, wife to Coppin de la Viefville, suspected of having hastened
  the death of the duchess of Burgundy, v. 380

  Ovidianus, (probably Huniades) defends Belgrade against the
  Turks, ix. 378

  Owen Glendower, prince of Wales, assisted by the French against
  the English, i. 104

  Oye, the town of, is taken by the Burgundians, vii. 357


  P.

  Pageants, given by the count de Foix to the court, at Tours, ix. 412

  Paleologus, Manuel, emperor of Constantinople, departs from Paris
  for England, i. 39
    account of his reason for coming to England, i. 40

  Palis, one of the duke of Burgundy's heralds, sent to the king during
  the duke's encampment at Mont-Chastillon, iv. 344

  Paoul, master Peter, ii. 17

  Pardons, great, granted at Rome, i. 38

  Paris, the university of, quarrels with sir Charles de Savoisy, i. 91
    the inhabitants of, arm themselves against the duke of Orleans, i. 154
    the inhabitants of, allowed to wear arms, i. 160
    the bishop of, retires to Savoy, ii. 136
    great distress in, for want of provisions, ii. 193
    the inhabitants of, arm against the Orleans factions, ii. 197
    the butchers of, enjoy greater power and privileges than any
    other trade, ii. 277
    the natives take up arms against the Armagnacs, ii. 278
    the inhabitants send an embassy to the young king Henry VI.
    of England, and to his ministers, vi. 13
    regains its former privileges, iii. 8
    the inhabitants request the king not to make any treaty of peace
    without their being personally named, iii. 40
    the university of, make a report on the abuses in government, iii. 98
    university of, advises the king relative to the abuses in his
    government, iii. 122
    the inhabitants of, demand the persons of certain traitors, iii. 146
    the bishop of, assembles a body of theologians, concerning the
    speech of master John Petit, iii. 279

  Paris, the chains are taken away from the streets, iv. 1
    the inhabitants are kept in great subjection, iv. 2
    the bishop of, sends to know whether the duke of Burgundy would
    avow the sentiments uttered in the speech of master John Petit, iv. 14
    the inhabitants and members of the university wait on the duke of
    Acquitaine to propose measures of public safety, iv. 205
    strongly defended by the count d'Armagnac, iv. 207
    a conspiracy at, iv. 348
    is taken by the duke of Burgundy, v. 7
    the commonalty of, put to death their prisoners, v. 20, 41
    an epidemical disorder rages at, v. 46
    six thousand of the commonalty sent to the siege of Montlehery, v. 50
    the inhabitants renew their oaths, and vow revenge against the
    murderers of the duke of Burgundy, v. 138
    is attacked by Charles VII. vi. 305
    is reduced to the obedience of Charles VII. vii. 324
    various regulations in, x. 385, 388
    beset by the Burgundians and Bretons, x. 401, 423, 426, 433
    several officers of the city displaced, xi. 220
    a man punished for forging the king's signet, xi. 363
    several persons hanged for having assassinated the son of the
    public executioner, xi. 270

  Paris, the statues of St Louis and St Charlemagne removed, xi. 279, 280
    great entertainments are given, on the king's return from
    Picardy, xi. 289
    a great bombard on trial bursts and kills many people, xi. 305
    a severe frost, xi. 323, 324
    many persons die of incurable disorders, xi. 333
    the steeple of St Genevieve burnt by lightning, xi. 351
    festival on the accession of Charles VIII. xi. 362
    order of Magdalens established, xi. 372
    the bridge of Notre Dame falls down, with a heavy loss, xii. 45
    an extraordinary heretic punished at, xii. 85
    a great mortality at, from the unwholesomeness of the season, xii. 100
    tilts performed in celebration of the marriage of Louis XII. with
    the princess Mary of England, xii. 168
    many persons of both sexes lose their senses at the bean season, xi. 22
    violent quarrel of the pages and clerks of the palace, xi. 25
    the queen most honourably received, xi. 39
    tournaments, xi. 67
    alliance of France and Spain proclaimed, xi. 91
    different edicts published, succours sent to Beauvais, xi. 132
    the Parisians mustered and reviewed, xi. 137

  Paris, the king's physicians open a man alive and recover him, xi. 178
    execution of the constable, xi. 313

  Parisians, the, their uniform during a mob, iii. 151
    they propose whatever measures they please in the presence of
    the duke of Acquitaine, iii. 152
    cause the king to publish an edict of indemnity, iii. 160

  Pataye, battle of, vi. 274

  Paul II. succeeds pope Pius II. x. 169
    shortens the intervals of the jubilees, xi. 119
    dies and is succeeded by Sixtus IV. xi. 120

  Pavia, entry of Charles VIII. into, xi. 405
    inhuman murder of a Frenchman at, xii. 140

  Pazzi, the conspiracy of the, at Florence, xi. 372

  Pecquigny, near Amiens, meeting of king Louis XI. and Edward king
  of England at, xi. 195

  Pembroke, earl of, slain at the attack on the castle of Sluys, i. 134
    Hollinshed's account of, _ib._

  Penhors, lord de, attacks the English fleet near Brest harbour, i. 9

  Pensart, Jean, a fisherman of Paris, robbed of a great sum
  of money, xi. 180

  Penthievre, the count de, treacherously takes the duke of Brittany
  prisoner, v. 252
    is arrested, _ib._
    marries the daughter of the lord de Quievrain, v. 258
    dies, vii. 139

  Penthievre, the count de, is sent into Guienne against Bordeaux, ix. 150

  Penthievre, the count de, receives an embassy to Louis XI. from
  the king of Arragon, xi. 164

  Pentoise, peace negotiated at, iii. 196

  Perche, the count du, son to the duke of Alençon, reduces the town
  of Alençon for the king, xi. 60

  Percy, Thomas, conducts queen Isabella to France, i. 40

  Percy, lord, his unsuccessful application to France for aid against
  Henry of England, i. 164
    invades Scotland, viii. 12

  Perpignan, siege of, by the king of Arragon, xi. 150
    surrenders to the king of France, xi. 182

  Perrin de Loharent's answer to the fourth letter of Michel d'Orris
  to sir John Prendergast, i. 36

  Perrinet le Clerc, admits the Burgundians into the town of Paris, v. 9
    is in great repute at Paris, but becomes as poor and as wicked
    as ever, v. 18

  Perrinet Chalons is hanged at Amiens, vii. 298

  Persia, soldan of, commander of the Turks in Hungary, discomfited
  and driven into Greece, ix. 363
    the sophi of, makes war on the Turk Usson Cassan, xii. 92

  Pestilence, in many places, viii. 94

  Peter de Brabant, arms against the English, i. 159
    marries the dowager countess of Blois, i. 160
    his army dismissed, i. 64
    besieges Neuf Chastel, i. 164
    engages the English at sea, i. 168

  Peter of Candia elected pope. See Alexander V. pope.

  Petit, master John, defends the murder of the duke of Orleans, i. 215
    his speech in defence of the duke of Burgundy, i. 221
    why he is bound to defend the duke, i. 226
    conclusion of his speech, i. 309
    dies, and is buried at Hesdin, ii. 234
    schedule containing propositions, &c. relative to his heresy, iii. 279
    his arguments condemned, iv. 14
    the sentence against him revoked, iv. 212

  Petit, John, the son of the public executioner at Paris,
  murdered, xi. 268

  Philibert de Vaudray, offers his services to the duke of Bedford, vii. 81

  Philip, the archduke, makes his public entry into Lyon, xii. 82
    dies at Burgos in Spain, xii. 105

  Philip, duke of Brabant, dies at Louvain, vi. 362

  Philip, count de Charolois, marries Michelle daughter to the king
  of France, i. 121
    his marriage opposed by the duke of Orleans, i. 123

  Philip, count de Nevers, espouses the sister of the count d'Eu, iii. 176
    is slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Philip count de St Pol goes to Brussels, and arrests the ministers
  of the duke of Brabant, v. 220

  Philip of Savoy, detained prisoner by king Louis XI. notwithstanding
  his safe conduct, x. 161

  Phineas, commended for his conduct towards duke Zambray, i. 244

  Picard, the Petit, the king's commander at Nesle, hanged by the duke
  of Burgundy, xi. 127

  Picardy, the lords of, are prevented by the duke of Burgundy from
  obeying the king's summons to arm against the English, iv. 153

  Picards and Ghent men, encounter each other, ix. 248

  Picalomini, Æneas Silvius, (pope Pius II.) dies, x. 378

  Piedmont, the princess of, meets Charles VIII. on his entry into
  Turin, xi. 390
    the prince of, sent by Louis XI. to open certain prisons
    at Paris, xi. 68
    dies at Orleans, xi. 116

  Pier-yves, lord de, ii. 23
    his speech to the Liegeois, ii. 29
    is killed in battle, ii. 35
    his head exposed on the point of a lance, ii. 38

  Pieruels, lord de, made governor of Liege, i. 176

  Pierrefons, the castle of, burnt, iii. 94

  Pierre de Regnault, forages the country round Abbeville, viii. 213
    is forced to dislodge from the castle of Mailly, viii. 343

  Pierre Floure, friar, preaches before Philip duke of Burgundy, v. 147

  Pietro della Luna, called Benedict XIII. i. 316

  Pillagers from the household of the king of France, commit depredations
  in the town of Haussy, viii. 272
    they are attacked by sir John de Croy, _ib._

  Pisa, council of, ii. 78, 89

  Pisa, council of, condemn the two rival popes Benedict and
  Gregory, ii. 90
    decisions of, ii. 96
    bishops, dukes, and ambassadors at, ii. 102
    some account of the city, ii. 103
    the ambassadors from Paris university to the council, write
    letters of what passed, ii. 105
    entrance of Charles VIII. into, xi. 410

  Pius II. succeeds pope Calixtus, ix. 425
    dies, x. 378

  Pius III. pope, dies after reigning ten days, xii. 87

  Poitiers, ambassadors arrive at, from the duke of Brittany
  to Louis XI. x. 374

  Poitou, the county of, is given to John of Touraine, second
  son of the king, iii. 335
    the seneschal of, undertakes an expedition against the castle
    of Loigny, ix. 21

  Poland, a discussion arises between the king of, and the grand
  master of the Teutonic order in Prussia, ii. 153
    the king of, is skinned alive by the Saracens, viii. 399

  Pont-Audemer, captured by the French, ix. 9

  Pont de l'Arche, is taken from the English by the duke of
  Brittany, viii. 437

  Pont du St Esprit, siege of, by the dauphin, v. 205

  Pontorson, siege of, v. 208, 221

  Pontoise, is retaken by the English, vii. 400
    is besieged by Charles VII. viii. 280
    the duke of York marches an army to force the king to raise
   the siege, viii. 287
    the town is taken after an obstinate defence, viii. 300

  Pontoise, the town of, taken by the Bretons, x. 279

  Porée, Martin, bishop of Arras, causes the sentence against
  master Jean Petit to be revoked, iv. 212

  Portugal, the king of, raises an army against the infidels, vi. 233
    the queen of, dies, viii. 402
    the king of, comes to solicit the aid of Louis XI. to recover
    the crown of Spain, xi. 239
    honours paid him at Paris, xi. 240

  Poton de Saintrailles, defeats the Burgundians near Guerbigny, vi. 390
    is made prisoner by the English, vii. 4

  Poulaine, the king of, his son killed in battle near Therouenne, xi. 314

  Poulcres castle, siege of, ix. 262

  Poussay, siege of, vii. 57

  Pragmatic sanction, abolished by king Louis XI. x. 94

  Prague, heretics of, v. 326, vi. 26

  Préaux, son of the lord de, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 186

  Precigny, the lord de, the commissioner of Louis XI. to settle
  differences with the confederate princes, x. 414

  Pregent, a French captain, defeats Howard the English admiral, xii. 158

  Prendergast, sir John, accepts the challenge of Michel d'Orris to
  single combat, i. 15
    his second letter to Michel d'Orris appointing the earl of Somerset
    judge of the combat, i. 18
    his third letter to the Arragonian esquire, complaining of not
    having received an answer, i. 20

  Prenestin, cardinal, commonly called the cardinal of Poitiers, preaches
  before the council of Pisa, ii. 99

  Prie, the lord de, with a body of Genoese, sacks Alexandria
  and other towns, xii. 180

  Prologue to the chronicles of Louis XI. and of Charles VIII. x. 355

  Protection-money, or black mail, viii. 257

  Protestus du Tabouret, a Hussite heretic, is slain, vii. 151

  Provins en Brie, the town and castle of, are won by the English
  and Burgundians, vii. 152

  Prussia, invaded by the infidels, ii. 172


  Q.

  Quarrel between the dukes of Burgundy and Orleans, i. 44
    between the dukes of Brabant and Holland, ii. 66

  Quesnes, sir Peter de, attacks Mondidier, ii. 305

  Quesnoy, a mortal combat fought at, i. 124
    siege of the castle of, by sir John de Luxembourg, v. 323

  Quex, John de, is killed by a fall from his horse, v. 279

  Quieret, sir Boors, lord of Henchin, taken prisoner at the battle
  of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Quieret, sir Peter, lord of Hamecourt, taken prisoner at the
  battle of Azincourt, _ib._

  Quieret, sir Gauvain, a renowned knight in arms, dies, x. 98

  Quiers, handsome entertainment of Charles VIII. at, xi. 396


  R.

  Raguier, John, his exploits at a tournament at Paris, xi. 65

  Ragnier, Raymond, complaint against, iii. 102

  Ragonnet de Picul is sawn in twain for his steadfastness in the
  Christian faith, vi. 165

  Rambouillet castle, siege of, vi. 162

  Rambures, lord de, taken prisoner, i. 130

  Rambures, the lord de, master of the cross bows, slain at the
  battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Rambures castle won by the French, vii. 3

  Rampstone, sir Thomas, waits on the duke of Bedford at Paris, vi. 107

  Raoul, sir, de Gaucourt, is put to death by the commonalty
  of Rouen, iv. 281

  Raoul, sir, de Neele, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 187

  Rasse Rouven, made commander of the Ghent men, viii. 71
    his commission is signed by the duke of Burgundy, viii. 74

  Raullin, Nicholas, death and character of, x. 95

  Ravenna, an extraordinary monster born at, xii. 128

  Ravenstein, the lady of, niece to the duchess of Burgundy, dies, x. 98

  Raymonnet, sir, de la Guerre, overthrown by the foreign companies in
  the service of the duke of Burgundy, iv. 287

  Recourt, Pierre de, quartered and hung at Paris, vi. 96

  Regent, the, an English ship set on fire by the Cordeliere, xii. 146

  Reginald, sir, de Corbie, is dismissed from his office of chancellor
  of France, iii. 175

  Réné d'Anjou, marriage of, v. 239

  Retz, the lord de, is accused and convicted of sorcery, viii. 298

  Reubempré, the bastard de, sent to Holland to take the count de
  Charolois, x. 169
    is arrested himself, x. 172
    particulars of the capture, x. 373

  Ribemont, the town of, surrenders to the king of France, viii. 262

  Richemont, the lord de, taken prisoner at the battle of
  Azincourt, iv. 194

  Richmond, heir of, sacks many towns in the Ardennes, vii. 186

  Richemont, the count de, gains the town of Meaux in Brie, from the
  English, viii 156

  Rieux, the marshal de, is defeated by the Burgundians at Paris, v. 14
    takes many towns and castles from the English in Normandy, vii. 301

  Riots, in various parts on account of the debasement of the new
  coinage for the siege of Calais, viii. 70

  Ris, doctor Michael, his reply to the harangue of Michael Toure
  at Milan, xii. 62

  Riviere, sir James de la, death of, iii. 174

  Robert, sir, de Bar, slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Roche, the lord de la, married to the princess of Tarente, xii. 69

  Rodemac, the youth of, ix. 418

  Roderigo de Villandras is compelled to make war on the English, viii. 114

  Rolin, Nicholas, harangues the two kings Charles VI. and Henry V.
  respecting the murder of the duke of Burgundy, v. 235

  Rollet d'Auctonville, principal of the assassins of the duke of
  Orleans, i. 195
    escapes with his accomplices from Paris, i. 203

  Rome, entry of Charles VIII. into, xi. 417
    a jubilee celebrated at, by pope Alexander VII. xii. 44

  Roos, the lord, is killed at the battle of Baugey, v. 263

  Rouen, an insurrection at, iv. 280
    the dauphin of France arrives at, iv. 283
    submits to the duke of Burgundy, iv. 386
    is besieged by the English, v. 40
    demands succour against the English, v. 54
    a large army is collected to raise the siege, v. 60
    distressed for provisions, the inhabitants send another
    embassy to the king for succour, v. 61
    surrendered to the English, v. 69
    the castle is nearly taken by the French, vii. 59
    attacked by Charles VII. ix. 55, 56
    surrenders, ix. 66
    is entered by the king, ix. 75

  Roullet castle is taken from the men of the lord de Moy, viii. 110

  Roussy, the count de, is made prisoner, ii. 347
    slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 186

  Roussy, the count de, and several other great lords, taken prisoners
  by the duke of Bourbon, xi. 190
    conducted prisoner from Bourges to Montils les Tours, xi. 207

  Roux, Robert le, ii. 26

  Roye, the inhabitants of, swear never again to admit the Orleans
  party, ii. 296

  Roye, the lord de, taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Roye, siege of, v. 154

  Rully, de Maurice, iii. 109

  Rue, the town of, is gained from the English, vii. 195
    taken possession of by the English, vi. 42

  Rupelmonde, battle of, between the duke of Burgundy and
  the Ghent men, ix. 218

  Rutland, earl of, hung in effigy by the count de St Pol, i. 86

  Rutland, duke of, iii. 220


  S.

  Sainct-Cler, sir Brunelet de, nominated provost of Paris, ii. 203

  Saint Maxence, the abbot of, his letter to the bishop of Poitiers
  on the election of Peter of Candia pope, ii. 91

  Saint Martin le Gaillart, siege of, v. 109

  Saint Remy du Plain, battle of, iii. 30

  Saint Severe, the town and castle of, are conquered by
  Charles VII. viii. 337

  Salerno, the prince of, makes war on the pope, vii. 104

  Salernum, the prince of, attends the triumphal entry of
  Charles VIII. into Naples, xii. 16

  Salisbury, the earl of, arrives in France with reinforcements for
  the duke of Bedford, vi 228
    conquers Gergeau, and other places near Orleans, vi. 232

  Salisbury, the earl of, besieges the town of Orleans, vi. 234
    he is slain, vi. 237

  Salmes, the heir of, killed in battle, ii. 35

  Sausien, master, and the messenger from Pietro della Luna, pilloried
  at Paris, i. 327

  Santa Croce, the cardinal of, is sent by the pope to France to
  negotiate a peace between the contending parties, vii. 76
    the cardinals of, attend the convention at Arras, vii. 211

  Santoise, the country of, is invaded by the English, viii. 181

  Santrailles, Poton de, seneschal of the Bordelois, dies, x. 89

  Saracen fleet combated by the king of Spain, i. 323

  Saracens, the, return to Cyprus, and conquer the king, vi. 182
    defeat the king of Poland near the black sea, viii. 399

  Saramie, John de, beheaded, ii. 40

  Sardonne, count de, i. 97

  Sancerre, the town and castle of, taken, iii. 61

  Saveuses, Hector de, attacks and plunders the town of Cambray, iv. 149
    murders sir Elyon de Jacqueville, iv. 369
    is defeated at the castle of Brelle, iv. 382
    is again defeated by the Dauphinois, vi. 86

  Saveuses, the lord de, is made prisoner by the French, vi. 318
    is defeated by the English near the town of Dours, viii. 258

  Saveuses, the lord de, his proceedings after the battle of
  Montlehery, x. 264
    escorts a sum of money from the duke of Burgundy to the count
    de Charolois, x. 273

  Savoisy, sir Charles de, and the provost of Paris, their quarrel
  with the university of Paris, i. 91
    is severely punished for his servant's attack on the university, i. 93
    his brave conduct during his exile and return to France, _ib._

  Savonarola, friar Jerome, foretels the invasion of Italy by
  Charles VIII. xi. 384

  Savoy, the duke of, war is declared against him by Charles VII. ix. 198

  Savoy, lady Charlotte of, her marriage with the dauphin
  consummated, ix. 408
    delivered of a son, who is baptized by the name of Joachim, x. 43

  Scales, lord, marches to the aid of the lord de l'Isle-Adam,
  at Paris, vii. 207

  Scales, an English herald, made prisoner, and many letters
  found on him, xi. 189

  Scas de Courteheuze conspires against the duke of Orleans, i. 192

  Scotland, the prince of Wales's expedition to, i. 189
    the queen of, dies, viii. 402
    two of the king's daughters arrive in France, viii. 505
    is twice invaded by the English, ix. 10
    king of, mortally wounded by the bursting of a cannon, x. 43
    the king of, enters England and is slain in battle, xii. 154

  Scotsman, the Little, is hung by order of the duke of Burgundy, viii. 375

  Scrope, lord, beheaded, iv. 141

  Segnot, William, knighted by the emperor of Germany, iv. 217

  Senamy, Marc, his exploits at a tournament at Paris, xi. 66

  Senlis, siege of, iv. 182, 393, 395

  Sens, the archbishop of, arrested, ii. 134
    escapes by a stratagem, _ib._
    banished the realm, ii. 136
    joins the Armagnacs, ii 311

  Sens, siege of, v. 198

  Sergius, the monk, apostatized through covetousness, i. 241

  Servolles, sir Philip de, besieges the castle of Moyennes, ii. 343

  Sforza, cardinal Ascanius, brother to the duke of Milan, is made
  prisoner and carried to France, xii. 51

  Sforza, Ludovico, incites Charles VIII. to recover the kingdom
  of Naples, xi. 383
    visits the king at Asti, xi. 399
    regains Milan from Louis XII. xii. 46
    made prisoner before Novara and carried to France, xii. 47
    brought to Lyon and confined, xii. 69

  Sforza, Maximilian, besieged in Milan, surrenders to Francis I. xii. 193

  Shepherd, Rev. W. his translation of the verses on the battle of
  Azincourt, iv. 198
    his translation of the complainings of the poor commonalty and
    labourers of France, v. 352

  Shrewsbury, the earl of, retakes Bordeaux from the French, ix. 200
    besieges Fronsac, ix. 297
    assembles a large force to raise the siege of Châtillon, ix. 299

  Shrewsbury, the earl of, is slain, ix. 302, 303

  Sicily, Louis, king of, enters Paris, ii. 149
    his eldest son marries the daughter of the duke of Burgundy, ii 157
    meets his rival king Ladislaus, ii. 159
    meets pope John, ii, 167
    attaches himself to the king against the Armagnacs, iii. 7
    leaves Paris, iii. 28
    comes to assist the king of France at the siege of Bourges, iii. 75
    sends back the daughter of the duke of Burgundy, iii. 264
    on the death of Ladislaus, sends the marshal of France
    to Naples, iv. 79
    is threatened by the duke of Burgundy, iv. 203
    dies, iv. 285

  Sicily, the king of, negotiates with the duke of Burgundy for his
  liberty, vii. 398
    comes to Châlons to treat for his ransom, viii. 401
    waits on the king of France at Louviers, ix. 49
    with his queen, visits Louis XI. at Tours and Amboise, xi. 90
    waits on the king at Lyon and procures the ransom of queen
    Margaret of England, xi. 232, 233

  Sigismond, king of Hungary, marries the sister of the queen
  of Poland, ii. 155

  Sigismund of Bohemia is elected emperor of Germany, iv. 73

  Sigismund of Bohemia, names of the dukes, prelates, counts, barons,
  &c. present at his coronation, iv. 75
    arrives at Paris, iv. 215
    embarks for England, iv. 216
    arrives in London, iv. 224
    he, and the king of England come to Calais, iv. 247
    raises an army against the heretics of Prague, v. 326

  Sixtus IV. succeeds pope Paul II. xi. 120
    excommunicates the city of Florence in revenge for the execution
   of the Pazzi conspirators, xi. 273
    sends a legate to the king of France and to the duke of
    Austria, xi. 293
    dies, xi. 365

  Skinners, certain French marauders, so nicknamed, viii. 60, 109

  Sohier Bunaige, fights a combat with M. Bournecte, i. 125
    is slain, i. 126

  Soissons, rebellion at, iii. 136

  Soissons, the town of, besieged and taken by storm by the
  king's army, iv. 27
    it is pillaged and destroyed, iv. 29
    the king gives orders for its rebuilding, iv. 34
    is conquered by La Hire, vii. 395
    curious conspiracy of a rector and a sorceress at, x. 50

  Somerset, the earl of, besieges Harfleur, viii. 200
    commits great waste in Anjou, viii. 349
    returns to Rouen, viii. 350

  Somerset, the duke of, has an interview with Charles VII.
  at Rouen, ix. 68

  Somerset, the duke of, he is besieged in the government palace
  at Rouen, ix. 70
    surrenders, ix. 74
    slain in battle against the duke of York, ix. 359

  Somerset, duke of, banished by king Edward, takes refuge in France, x. 92

  Sorel, Agnes. See Agnes the fair.

  Sores, the lord de, with three hundred men at arms, secretly attempts
  to seize the king of Sicily, iv. 231

  Spain, the queen of, dies during the sitting of the council
  of Pisa, ii. 77
    the queen of, dies, viii. 402
    alliance of with France proclaimed at Paris, xi. 91
    an embassy arrives from, at Paris, xi. 312

  Spurs, the battle of, xii. 153

  Stafford, earl of, dies, iv. 145

  St Amand, fire at the town of, vi. 74

  St Basil, anecdote of, Julian, i. 237
    his vision concerning the death of Julian, i. 238

  St Cloud, given up to Charles, duke of Orleans, ii. 313
    fierce engagement at, ii. 330

  St Dennis, the abbot of, set at liberty from the Louvre, ii. 18

  St Denis, town of, is taken from the English by
  sir John Foulcault, vii. 205
    is retaken by the English, vii. 283

  St Dizier, capture of, v. 350

  St Emilion, taken by the French, ix. 305

  St Germain d'Auxerre, the dean of, arrested by the university
  of Paris, i. 319

  St George, the cardinal of, confined at Florence for conspiring
  with the Pazzi, xi. 273

  St Jacques de Beuvron, siege of, ix. 16

  St James de Beuvron, the town of, besieged, vi. 217

  Stine, a young girl of Hame in Westphalia pretends to have the
  wounds of our Lord in her hands, feet, and side, xi. 121

  St Lo, siege of, ix. 39

  St Maigrin, taken by the French, viii. 444

  St Martin, castle of, surprized by some captains belonging to
  sir John of Luxembourg, vii. 1

  St Omer, the town of, taken by the lord des Cordes, xi. 373

  St Pietro ad vincula, the cardinal de, legate from the pope,
  arrives at Paris, xi. 320
    elected Pope, by the name of Julius II. xii. 88

  St Pol, count de, dies suddenly, and is succeeded by Louis
  de Luxembourg, vii. 134
    his misunderstanding with the duke of Burgundy, ix. 406
    summoned before king Louis XI. pacifies him, x. 159
    commands the van of the army of count Charolois, x. 236, 240

  St Riquier, siege of, v. 284

  St Severin, siege of, vii. 174

  St Tron, treaty of, between the Liegeois and the count de
  Charolois, x. 309
    inhabitants of, attempt to murder the count's men but are
    overpowered, x. 313

  Stuart, sir Robert, is hung for aiding in the murder of James I. viii. 3

  St Valery, siege of, v. 346
    is reconquered by the count d'Estampes, vii. 164

  St Valery, the town of, is won by the French, vii. 115, 153

  Suffolk, the earl of, succeeds the earl of Salisbury in the
  command at the siege of Orleans, vi. 237
    is taken prisoner at Gergeau, vi. 504

  Suffolk, the marquis of, is imprisoned in the tower by the populace
  of London, viii. 431
    is liberated by the king, and afterwards beheaded, viii. 432, 433

  Suffolk, the duke of, is killed by the partisans of the duke of
  Somerset, ix. 116

  Surienne, sir Francis de, called the Arragonian, takes the town and
  castle of Fougares, viii. 427

  Swiss, the, defeat the duke of Burgundy at Granson, xi. 228
    take possession of Milan, xii. 138
    defeat the French army at Novara, xii. 148
    are pursued by Francis I. with his whole army, xii. 179

  Symon, St, and another crucified by the Jews, xi. 274


  T.

  Tabary, a noted robber, v. 38

  Talbot, the lord, arrives in France and conquers many castles, vii. 161
    sir Thomas Kiriel and other captains conquer Longueville and
    many other castles from the French, viii. 94

  Tamerlane invades the dominions of Bajazet, i. 106

  Tancarville, the count de, harangues the French council on the
  state of the nation, ii. 144

  Tanneguy, sir, is sent from Montereau-faut-Yonne to summon the
  duke of Burgundy to attend the dauphin, v. 114
    murders the duke, v. 121

  Tartas, the town of, surrenders to the king of France, viii. 337

  Thomelaire, the adventurer, takes the castle of Passavaul, vii. 104

  Thomas de Sarzana. See Nicholas V.

  Thomelin de Brie, beheaded, iii. 175

  Therouenne, besieged by the English and Hainaulters, xii. 151
    capitulates to the English, xii. 157

  Three estates, assembly of, at Tours, under Louis XI. question
  agitated there, xi. 62

  Thurey, cardinal de, arrives at Paris as ambassador from pope
  Alexander V. ii. 149
    object of his embassy, ii. 151

  Titet, master John, beheaded, iv. 33

  Tignouville, the lord de, arrested, ii. 134

  Tigouville, sir William de, causes two clerks of the Paris university
  to be gibbeted, i. 94
    is compelled to kiss the dead bodies, _ib._

  Tollemache de Sainte Coulonne, i. 96
    is very severely struck by the seneschal of Hainault, i. 100

  Tonnellier, Chariot le, a thief, while going to the torture, cuts
  out his tongue, xi. 84

  Torcy castle, is taken by the French, vi. 300

  Toumelaire, an adventurer so called, besieges the castle of
  Champigneux, vi. 361

  Tournament at Brussels, vi. 244
    near Dijon, by some knights and gentlemen of the duke of
   Burgundy's household, viii. 351

  Tournament at Brussels, the challenges for it, viii. 352
    articles for the deeds of arms on foot, viii. 355

  Touraine, John, duke of, marries Jacqueline de Baviere, i. 162
    the county of Poitou is given to him, iii. 135
    has the county of Poitou and the duchy of Berry conferred on
    him by the king, iv. 226

  See Charolois, the count de.

  Tournay, two masters of arts are sent to, to persuade the inhabitants
  to be loyal towards the dauphin, vi. 82
    the inhabitants of, rebel against their magistrates, vi. 97
    the townsmen of, again rebel, vi. 231
    dissentions respecting the promotion to the bishoprick vacant by
    the death of John de Toisy, vii. 118
    capitulates to the English, xii. 157

  Tours en Porcien, castle taken by sir John of Luxembourg, vii. 55

  Tours, embassy at, from Hungary to the king of France, ix. 409

  Touse, Michael, town advocate of Milan, his harangue, xii. 55

  Touteville, the cardinal de, is sent from the pope to France
  respecting peace, ix. 191

  Traitors may be put to death without law, i. 260
    ought to be slain by those nearest of kin to the king, i. 273
    it is lawful to kill them clandestinely, i. 276

  Treason, the greatest of crimes, i. 234, 257
    various kinds of, i. 281

  Treasury of Savings office, iii. 108

  Treaty for settling the affairs of the bishoprick of Liege, ii. 45, 59

  Tries, sir Patroullars de, slain, i. 105

  Trimouille, the lord de, marries the widow of the duke of Berry, iv. 246

  Trimouille, sir John de la, marries the damsel of Rochebaron, vi. 111

  Trimouille, the lord de, is arrested in the king's palace, vii. 137

  Trimouille, the lord de la, sent to negociate with the Swiss, xii. 150

  Trivulce, the damsel, xii. 109

  Tronquoy in Picardy, taken by the king's troops and razed to
  the ground, xi. 186

  Troullart de Moncaurel, is attacked by a party of Armagnacs, ii. 325

  Truce concluded between England and France, i. 188

  Turin, magnificent reception of Charles VIII. at, xi. 395

  Turks, the, besiege Rhodes, and being repulsed invade
  Sicily, xi. 275, 276

  Tythes of the French church, ii. 210


  U.

  Ursin Talvande, master, harangues against Pietro della Luna, i. 328, 330

  Usson Cassan, conquered by the sophi of Persia, xii. 94

  Utrecht, bishop of, dies, ix. 355
    the duke of Burgundy's bastard son David succeeds him, ix. 372


  V.

  Vailly, John de, is appointed chancellor to the duke of
  Acquitaine, iii. 134
    is forcibly seized by the Parisians, iii. 147

  Valentinois, the duke of, (Cæsar Borgia) makes his public entry
  into Lyon, xii. 43

  Valognes, surrenders to sir Thomas Kiriel, ix. 106

  Valoux, Regnault de, executed for forming conspiracies
  against the king, xi. 202

  Vaucourt, the lord de, taken prisoner at the battle of
  Azincourt, iv. 194

  Vaucourt, sir Louis de, is made prisoner by the English, vii. 4

  Vaudemont, the country of, invaded by the duke of Bar, vii. 29

  Vaudemont, the count de, ii. 270
    slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 185

  Vaudemont, the count de, combats and defeats the duke of Bar, vii. 40
    is taken prisoner at the instigation of the duke of Burgundy, xi. 153

  Vaudoisie, a nocturnal meeting of sorcerers, x. 44

  Vauperte, a master of the, condemned to be hanged, xi. 393

  Vaudome, the count de, taken prisoner at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 194

  Venetians defeated by the French at Agnadello, xii. 113
    make peace with Louis VII. xii. 155

  Verchin, John de, sends a challenge into divers countries,
  proposing a deed of arms, i. 49
    resolves on a pilgrimage to the shrine of St James at
    Compostella, i. 52

  Verchin, John de, performs deeds of arms in seven places during
  his pilgrimage, i. 54

  Verde, Sente, companions of the, ix. 246, 249

  Verdun, the bishop of, harangues at the council of Pisa, in favour
  of pope Gregory, ii. 94
    his arguments replied to, ii. 99

  Vergy, lord de, ii. 23

  Vergy, sir John du, and sir Anthony, quarrel with the lord de
  Château-Vilains, vii. 109

  Verneuil, battle of, vi. 189
    is taken by a miller whom an Englishman had beaten, ix. 4
    the king enters, ix. 20

  Vernon, submits to Charles VII. ix. 24

  Verses found on the king's bed after his return from mass in the
  year 1446, viii. 405

  Vertus, the count de, and several of the nobility leave Paris, iii. 165

  Vervins, the town of, is treacherously taken by sir Cluget
  de Brabant, iii. 45
    is besieged and retaken, iii. 47

  Viefville, the lord de, arrested and imprisoned, iii. 213

  Villain, John, his courageous behaviour at the battle of Mons, v. 300

  Villars, the viscount of, dies, xi. 96

  Villefranche, the town of, is attacked by the Burgundians, vii. 171

  Villeneuve-le-Roi, taken by scalado, v. 205
    is retaken by the Dauphinois, v. 258
    is again surrendered to the English, v. 305, 316

  Vire, the English are defeated at, ix. 91

  Vitout, John, governor of Metz, viii. 397

  Voltri, dreadful riot at, ii. 86


  W.

  Waes, county of, is invaded by the duke of Burgundy, ix. 210

  Waleran, the count de St Pol lands a large force in the
  Isle of Wight, i. 115
    is deceived by a priest of the island, _ib._
    marches an army before the castle of Mercq, where he is beaten
    by the English, i. 126
    sends an especial summons throughout Picardy for an assembly of
    men at arms, i. 132
    is deprived of his command, _ib._
    made grand butler of France, ii. 192
    is sent against the Armagnacs, ii. 337
    assembles a large armed force at Vernon sur Seine, iii. 12
    marches into the Boulonois, iii. 49
    meets in council at Lille with the duke of Burgundy, iii. 231
    receives letters, ordering him up to Paris to resign his
    constable's sword, _ib._
    refuses to obey, _ib._
    another embassy is sent to him, iii. 236
    still refuses to obey, iii. 244
    has a severe fall from his horse, which he uses as a pretext
    not to fight, iv. 25
    is abused by a skirmishing party during the siege of Arras, iv. 52
    marches about 600 combatants into the duchy of Luxembourg, iv. 88
    dies at Yvoix, iv. 121

  Wales, the prince of, said to wage war against the Scots, i. 189
    succeeds to the throne of England on the death of Henry
    of Lancaster, iii. 139

  Warwick, the earl of, attends the council of Constance, iv. 91
    drives the French from several places they had won, x. 120
    visits Louis XI. at Rouen, xi. 32
    banished from England by king Edward, comes to France, xi. 97
    returns to England and heads an army against king Edward, xi. 103
    reinstates Henry VI. xi. 105
    slain in battle against Edward IV. xi. 115

  Watelin Tieulier, makes war on the count de Vaudemont, viii. 92

  Widows and orphans merit peculiar protection, ii. 2

  Wiege castle, siege of, vi. 76

  Wight, Isle of, invaded by the French, i. 115
    freed by the cunning of a priest, _ib._

  William, duke, count of Hainault, mortal combat before, i. 125
    swears friendship towards the duke of Burgundy, iv. 251
    carries his son in law the dauphin of France to Compiègne,
    where he dies, iv. 254, 255
    dies, iv. 263

  William le Begue murdered, v. 36

  William VI. earl of Douglas is barbarously murdered, viii. 7

  Willoughby, the lord, death of, iv. 145
    lays siege to the town of St Severin, vii. 174

  Winchester, bishop of, sent ambassador to France, i. 158

  Winchester, the peace of, ii. 200
    the palace of, destroyed, ii. 318

  Winchester, the cardinal of, attends the convention at Arras, vii. 232
    leaves Arras, vii. 340

  Witchcraft, the crime of high treason, i. 279

  Woodville, sir Richard, marries the duchess of Bedford without
  a licence, and is fined 1000 to the king, vii. 397

  Wool, great distress for the want of in Flanders, viii. 70

  Worcester, battle between the Welsh and English, near, i. 104

  Worthies, nine, who, vii. 43


  X.

  Xancoins, master John de, is convicted of peculation,
  and punished, ix. 153


  Y.

  York, the duke of, is slain at the battle of Azincourt, iv. 182

  York, the duke of, marches an army to force the king of France
  to raise the siege of Pontoise, viii. 287
    follows the king of France to Mauisson, viii. 294
    advances in battle array before Poissy, viii. 296
    seizes the government of England, ix. 349
    defeats the king and the duke of Somerset, ix. 359
    made prisoner by queen Margaret and beheaded, ix. 49

  Ysambert D'Azincourt, iv. 181

  Yvain Graindos, a corruption of Owen Glendower, iii. 145

  Yvetot, the king of, dies at Lyon, xii. 71


  Z.

  Zambray, Simeon of, one of the twelve tribes of Israel,
  cause of his apostacy, i. 242

  Zealand, inundation in, caused by the breaking of the dykes, xi. 84

  Zeneuberche, siege of, vi. 178


THE END.


H. Bryer, Printer, Bridge-street, Blackfriars, London.


Transcriber's Note:
Original spelling, including any inconsistencies, has been retained.
Index above relates to all 12 volumes, of which, as at June 2021,
only 9 are available on Project Gutenberg.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CHRONICLES OF ENGUERRAND DE
MONSTRELET, VOL. 12 [OF 13] ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
